Title: VGFM: Expressive Robot Policies via Dense Value Guidance in Flow Matching

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.14261v1

Published Time: Tue, 15 Sep 2026 01:06:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# VGFM: Expressive Robot Policies via Dense Value Guidance in Flow Matching 

Prajwal Koirala 1 and Mark Campbell 1

Abstract — Recent robot learning paradigms increasingly rely on large offline datasets of robotic interactions to train con-trol policies. Expressive generative models enable rich and multimodal action representations, expanding the capability of this paradigm for complex robotic control. However, policy improvement with multi-step generative actors remains chal-lenging. In offline reinforcement learning (RL), incorporating value-based objectives along generative trajectories often intro-duces substantial training complexity, including backpropaga-tion through time (BPTT), auxiliary architectures, or distillation losses. We propose Value-Guided Flow Matching (VGFM), a scalable offline RL framework that enables dense value-guided shaping within a flow-based policy while avoiding BPTT and ad-ditional algorithmic overhead. VGFM parameterizes the policy as a conditional flow-matching model in action (x-prediction) space, ensuring that each intermediate flow step produces a valid robot action that can be directly evaluated by a standard offline RL critic. This design allows value guidance to be applied at randomly sampled flow times without differentiating through the entire generative trajectory, while preserving inference-time flexibility by varying the discretization of the underlying flow ODE without retraining. Evaluated on robotic locomotion and manipulation tasks in OGBench, VGFM achieves strong performance across a wide range of tasks under rigorous eval-uation protocols. With minimal hyperparameter tuning, these results demonstrate that VGFM provides a simple, scalable, and effective approach for expressive policy learning in long-horizon, goal-oriented robotic control. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Learning from pre-collected static robotic datasets has become a key paradigm for training control policies without additional environment interaction. By leveraging large-scale demonstrations or logged trajectories, robots can acquire complex skills while avoiding the safety risks and high costs associated with online exploration. Offline reinforce-ment learning (RL) provides a principled framework for this setting, allowing agents to optimize policies solely from pre-viously collected data without requiring further interaction with the environment. A central challenge in offline RL is distribution shift: the learned robot policy may produce actions that fall outside the dataset, leading to unsafe or ineffective behaviors [1], [2]. As robotic datasets become more diverse and heterogeneous, the underlying state–action distributions often exhibit strong multimodality and composi-tional structure, demanding expressive policy classes that can  

> *This work was supported by NSF CPS grant CNS-2211599 and NSF FRR grant IIS-2305532.
> 1Prajwal Koirala and Mark Campbell are with the Sibley School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Cornell University.

{pk596, mc288 }@cornell.edu   

> Code is available at: https://github.com/PrajwalKoirala/ VGFM_Policy .
> (a) OGBench tasks
> (b) VGFM framework
> Fig. 1: Overall illustration of the proposed VGFM framework and bench-mark tasks it is evaluated on. (a) Examples of robotic manipulation and locomotion environments used for evaluation, spanning maze navigation, goal-directed interaction, and multi-stage object manipulation. (b) Illustra-tion of how VGFM applies value guidance (Q-loss) to each intermediate step of a flow-based policy. A 2D unimodal Gaussian is transported to a multimodal 2D action distribution over multiple steps, with Q-loss applied at each intermediate flow step.

accurately represent such complexity. This motivates the use of generative models to construct expressive, yet behaviorally consistent policies [2]. Recent advances in generative models (like diffusion [3], [4] and flow-matching [5], [6]) have demonstrated strong ca-pacity to represent complex, multimodal conditional distribu-tions, making them appealing for expressive policy learning in offline reinforcement learning (RL). In realistic domains such as robotics and autonomous driving, offline datasets typically aggregate diverse, task-relevant strategies—such as varying grasp orientations, approach angles, or conflicting topological choices at road intersections (e.g., turning left versus continuing straight)—that are poorly captured by unimodal policy parameterizations. By enabling policies to faithfully model this behavioral diversity while remaining tightly constrained to the data distribution, generative poli-cies offer a principled mechanism for improving generaliza-tion and robustness in offline RL, while maintaining strong behavioral constraints from data [7], [2], [8]. However, integrating diffusion- and flow-based policies into value-based offline reinforcement learning remains non-trivial. In standard off-policy actor–critic frameworks such as DDPG+BC (or TD3+BC [9]), policy improvement requires computing gradients of the action-value function with respect to the policy’s output action. When the policy is parame-arXiv:2609.14261v1 [cs.RO] 13 Sep 2026 terized as a flow-matching model, this action is generated via a multi-step continuous-time generative process, typi-cally instantiated through numerical ODE integration of a learned velocity field. Consequently, propagating the policy improvement signal necessitates backpropagation through the entire flow trajectory. This reliance on backpropagation through time (BPTT) incurs substantial computational over-head and can introduce numerical instability, particularly as the number of integration steps increases or when deploying expressive, high-dimensional policy parameterizations [10]. Several recent works attempt to address this limitation. For example, Flow Q-Learning (FQL) [10] avoids BPTT by distilling the learned generative policy into a separate single-step network, simplifying training but sacrificing inference-time scalability, as multi-step generation is no longer avail-able. Scalable Offline RL (SORL) [11] introduces shortcut models that allow inference-time trade-offs between accuracy and computation, but still requires BPTT during training through the generative process. Single-Step Completion Poli-cies (SSCP) [12] avoid BPTT by predicting completion vectors within a single network, but empirical results suggest limited gains from increased inference-time computation, restricting the benefits of multi-step generation. In this work, we propose a simple and scalable alternative. We apply a standard DDPG+BC-style policy improvement objective directly to a flow-matching policy by predicting end-target actions at each flow step, while applying learn-ing signals in the velocity (or displacement) space. This decoupling enables each flow step to be supervised by both behavioral cloning and value-based policy improvement without requiring backpropagation through the generative trajectory. As a result, the policy can be discretized arbitrarily and supports inference-time scalability—allowing multi-step generation when compute is available—while maintaining stable and efficient training. Empirically, we show that this value-guided flow formulation scales to expressive, multi-step policies and achieves strong performance on standard offline RL benchmarks, particularly in settings where multi-modality and action diversity are essential. Key contributions of this work are as follows.  

> •

We introduce a value-guided formulation of flow match-ing policies, interpreting each step of the flow as a return-optimizing decision in action space, and applying a DDPG+BC-style objective at every step to enable value-guided policy improvement.  

> •

We introduce an end-target prediction objective with velocity-space losses that enables policy improvement without backpropagation through the generative trajec-tory in an offline RL setting.  

> •

We demonstrate that this approach supports inference-time scalability with multi-step generation and achieves strong empirical performance in most robotic manipula-tion and locomotion tasks in OGBench [13] benchmark. II. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Offline Reinforcement Learning 

We consider a Markov Decision Process (MDP) M =(S, A, p, r, ρ, γ ), where S and A denote the state and action spaces, p(s′|s, a ) is the transition dynamics, r(s, a ) is the reward function, ρ(s) is the initial state distribution, and 

γ ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor. A stochastic policy πθ (a|s) : 

S → ∆( A) induces the trajectory distribution pπθ (τ ) = 

ρ(s0) QT −1 

> h=0

πθ (ah | sh)p(sh+1 | sh, a h), and the expected return is J(πθ ) = Eτ ∼pπθ 

hPTh=0 γhr(sh, a h)

i

.In the offline RL setting, the agent has access only to a fixed dataset D = ( s, a, r, s ′) collected by an unknown behavior policy πβ , without further environment interaction. A key challenge in this setting is distributional shift: when πθ

selects out-of-distribution (OOD) actions not covered by D,the corresponding value estimates Q(s, a ) become unreliable, leading to performance degradation [9], [14]. To mitigate this, many offline RL algorithms regularize the learned policy to remain close to the behavior distribution, often via a divergence constraint: 

max  

> π

J(π) s.t. DKL (π(· | s), π β (· | s)) ≤ δ. (1) A practical instantiation of this principle is the behavior-regularized actor-critic framework, which augments the actor loss with a behavior cloning (BC) term [15], [16]: 

Lπ(θ) = E(s, a ) ∼ D  − Qϕ(s, π θ (s)) + α log πθ (a | s),

(2) where α > 0 balances exploitation and conservatism. This formulation enables stable policy optimization by constrain-ing updates to remain within the data support. In most exist-ing methods, πθ is modeled as a unimodal Gaussian, which simplifies gradient computation but limits expressiveness in multimodal datasets. 

B. Diffusion and Flow-Based Generative Models a) Diffusion models.: Diffusion models [3], [4], [17] learn to reverse a gradual noising process that transforms data into noise through a stochastic differential equation (SDE): 

dxt = f (t)xtdt + g(t)dwt, (3) where wt is standard Brownian motion and f (t), g (t) spec-ify the drift and diffusion schedules. A neural network is trained to approximate the reverse-time dynamics, typically by predicting the noise added at each step via denoising score matching. Sampling then proceeds by numerically integrating a reverse-time SDE or its deterministic counterpart, the probability flow ODE. While diffusion models achieve high-quality generative performance, they often require many it-erative steps at inference time, which limits their practicality for control applications. 

b) Flow matching.: Flow matching [6], [5] provides a deterministic alternative to diffusion-based generative mod-eling by directly learning a time-dependent velocity field that transports a simple base distribution to the data distribution. Let p0(z) = N (0, I ) denote the base distribution and p1(x) = pdata (x) the target data distribution. Intermediate states are constructed via linear interpolation between base and data samples: 

xt = (1 − t)z + tx, t ∼ U [0 , 1] . (4) Flow matching learns a velocity field vθ (xt, t ) that matches the optimal velocity vector field x−z along these interpolated paths by minimizing 

LFM (θ) = Et, z,x

∥vθ (xt, t ) − (x − z)∥22

, (5) where z ∼ p0 and x ∼ pdata . At inference time, new samples are generated by integrating the learned ordinary differential equation 

dxt

dt = vθ (xt, t ), x0 ∼ N (0, I ), (6) which deterministically maps latent samples to the data manifold. III. M ETHOD : V ALUE -G UIDED FLOW MATCHING 

(VGFM) 

A. Problem Formulation and Motivation 

We build upon the KL-regularized policy improvement objective commonly adopted in offline RL [16], [18]: 

π⋆ = arg max  

> π

Es∼D 

h

Ea∼π(·| s)[Q(s, a )] −

α KL  π(·| s) ∥ πβ (·| s)i (7) where Q(s, a ) is a critic trained via standard offline RL procedures (e.g., TD3+BC style) and α > 0 controls the strength of behavior regularization. The solution to Eq. (7) admits the advantage-weighted form 

π⋆(a|s) ∝ πβ (a|s) exp   1 

> α

Q(s, a ) , (8) and taking gradients with respect to the action yields the score decomposition 

∇a log π⋆(a|s) = ∇a log πβ (a|s) + 1 

> α

∇aQ(s, a ). (9) This decomposition reveals policy improvement as the su-perposition of two gradients: behavior matching ( ∇a log πβ )and value guidance ( ∇aQ). Eq. (9) implies that value gradients can guide policy improvement at every intermediate point along a generative trajectory, rather than only at the terminal action, enabling dense credit assignment across denoising steps. However, realizing this in flow- or diffusion-based policies is chal-lenging. Conventional approaches such as DQL [7] and CAC [19] require propagating value gradients through the entire generative process, which entails backpropagation through time (BPTT) over many discretized steps. For long hori-zons, BPTT becomes memory-intensive and computationally costly, and in offline RL it can introduce instability due to vanishing/exploding gradients and compounded approxima-tion errors. To address these limitations, prior work either distills the generative policy into a separate network [10], [20] or introduces auxiliary objectives (e.g., shortcut or com-pletion losses) to reduce the effective generation depth [12], [11]. Some recent methods like [21] also use a time-conditioned noise-level critic for dense guidance along the generative path. To retain dense value guidance without incurring full BPTT, we introduce a flow-matching parameterization whose x-prediction formulation [22] enables BPTT-free value guid-ance. Importantly, consistent with policy-constrained offline RL, we do not require globally accurate critics; instead, we assume that the critic provides locally meaningful gradients within dataset-supported regions of the action space. Our objective is not to compute the exact optimizer of Eq. (7), but to design an inference-time scalable flow-based policy that leverages value gradients densely along the generative trajectory while preserving behavior regularization. 

B. Flow-Based Policy Parameterization 

To realize the decomposition in Eq. (9) within a generative policy framework, we parameterize the conditional policy 

πθ (a | s) as a flow-matching model that deterministically transports samples from a base distribution p0 = N (0, I ) to actions in the dataset-supported region. For a given state s,we define a continuous trajectory {at}t∈[0 ,1] ⊂ Rd via linear interpolation between a latent sample a0 ∼ p0 and a terminal action a1:

at = (1 − t)a0 + ta 1, t ∈ [0 , 1] . (10) The generative process is governed by an ordinary differen-tial equation 

da t

dt = uθ (s, a t, t ), (11) where uθ : S × Rd × [0 , 1] → Rd is a neural velocity field. Integrating Eq. (11) from t = 0 to t = 1 with initial condition 

a0 ∼ p0 yields a stochastic action sample a1, with policy expressivity controlled by the expressiveness of uθ rather than by distributional assumptions (e.g., Gaussian nature of 

p0). 

a) Flow matching as behavior regularization.: Rather than training the flow via likelihood maximization or ad-versarial objectives, we adopt flow matching [6] to directly enforce proximity to the empirical behavior distribution. Given a state-action pair (s, a 1) ∼ D and a base sample 

a0 ∼ p0, we construct the interpolated point at via Eq. (10) for t ∼ U [0 , 1] and minimize the regression objective 

LFM (θ) = E(s,a 1)∼D 

> a0∼p0
> t∼U [0 ,1]

h

uθ (s, a t, t ) − (a1 − a0) 22

i

. (12) Critically, LFM implements behavior regularization by con-struction : the optimal velocity field transports mass from 

p0 precisely toward the empirical action distribution in D

induced by πβ . Unlike KL penalties added post-hoc to policy gradients, flow matching embeds conservatism directly into the policy parameterization, ensuring that even intermediate flow states remain anchored to dataset-supported regions. b) x-prediction as the enabler of BPTT-free guidance: 

We implement the velocity field via an x-prediction pa-rameterization [22], where the network directly predicts the terminal action ˆaθ (s, a t, t ) and the velocity is recovered analytically: 

uθ (s, a t, t ) = ˆaθ (s, a t, t ) − at

1 − t . (13) While x-prediction, together with the v-loss (eg. in Eq. (12)), is motivated by performance and stability in general gener-ative task in [22], we emphasize its conceptual significance 

in this work for value-guided policy learning: 

Lemma 1 (Action-Space Validity): Under the x-prediction parameterization in Eq. (13), for any state s, intermediate flow state at, and time t ∈ [0 , 1) , the prediction ˆaθ (s, a t, t )

lies in the action space A and can be directly evaluated by a time-independent critic Qϕ(s, a ).

Proof Sketch: By construction, ˆaθ (s, a t, t ) is a direct predic-tion in the action space rather than a velocity or noise vector. The flow-matching objective in Eq. (12) further ensures that, in expectation over t, these predictions remain regu-larized toward the empirical action distribution: minimizing 

∥uθ − (a1 − a0)∥2 enforces consistency between ˆaθ (s, a t, t )

and the dataset action a1 across all interpolation times. Consequently, ˆaθ (s, a t, t ) remains within regions where Qϕ

provides meaningful gradients. □

This property, action-space validity with implicit behavior regularization, is the key enabler for dense value guidance without backpropagation through time. As we show next, it allows us to apply value-based supervision at arbitrary flow times using a standard behavior-regularized off-policy policy gradient method, bypassing the need for noise-level critics or flow trajectory-level differentiation. 

C. Value Guidance Without Backpropagation Through Time 

Section III-A identified a fundamental tension: while the score decomposition in Eq. (9) suggests that value gradients could guide policy improvement at every point along a gener-ative trajectory, prior implementations require backpropaga-tion through time (BPTT) over the flow traejctory. Lemma 1 resolves this tension by guaranteeing that, under x-prediction with flow matching, intermediate predictions ˆaθ (s, a t, t ) re-main valid actions within dataset-supported regions. This property enables a simple yet powerful alternative: applying value-based supervision directly to intermediate predictions 

using a standard, time-independent critic—without differen-tiating through the generative trajectory. 

a) Dense value supervision via action-space predic-tions: For a state s ∼ D , dataset action a1 ∼ D , base sample a0 ∼ p0, and time t ∼ U [0 , 1] , we construct the interpolated state at via Eq. (10) and apply value guidance to the predicted terminal action ˆaθ (s, a t, t ):

LπQ (θ) = −E(s,a 1)∼D 

> a0∼p0
> t∼U [0 ,1]

h

Qϕ

 s, ˆaθ (s, a t, t )i

. (14) Critically, gradients of LQ flow only through the network parameters at the sampled time t, not through the flow dynamics or across multiple time steps. Each training iter-ation thus provides an independent supervision signal that encourages the velocity field to steer intermediate flow states toward higher-value terminal actions, realizing the value-guidance term ∇aQ(s, a ) in Eq. (9) densely along the flow trajectory without BPTT. 

b) Combined objective and interpretation: We train the flow matching policy by jointly optimizing behavior regularization (Eq. 12) and value guidance (Eq. 14): 

L(θ) = α LFM (θ) + LπQ (θ), (15) where α ≥ 0 controls the relative strength of regularization. This objective implements a practical approximation to the KL-regularized policy improvement in Eq. (7), where:  

> •

LFM enforces the behavior-matching term 

∇a log πβ (a|s) by anchoring the entire flow trajectory to the empirical action distribution.  

> •

LQ implements the value-guidance term ∇aQ(s, a ) at 

every sampled flow time t, providing dense supervision without generative trajectory differentiation. The result is a policy that remains conservative with respect to the dataset while being biased toward higher-value ac-tions throughout the generative process—not merely at the terminal step. Overall, training follows an actor–critic paradigm, anal-ogous to TD3+BC, with the combined policy objective as-suming a structure similar to Eq. (2). The critic is optimized concurrently using the standard Bellman backup loss: 

LQ(ϕ) = E(s,a,r,s ′)∼D 

"

Qϕ(s, a )−



r + γ · min  

> i=1 ,2

Qϕ′ 

> i

(s′, π θ (s′)) 

 2

#

.

(16) 

D. Algorithmic Properties and Relation to Prior Work 

Algorithm 1 VGFM Training 

Require: Dataset D, critic Qϕ, x-pred network aθ (inducing velocity field uθ and flow-matching policy πθ ) 

> 1:

for N training iterations do  

> 2:

Sample batch {(s, a, r, s ′)} ∼ D  

> 3:

// Critic Qϕ update Eq. (16)  

> 4:

Update ϕ using clipped double Q-learning  

> 5:

// Flow policy πθ update Eq. (15)  

> 6:

a0 ∼ N (0, I), a1 ← a, t ∼ U [0 , 1)  

> 7:

at ← (1 − t)a0 + ta 1 

> 8:

ˆaθ ← ˆaθ (s, a t, t ) 

> 9:

uθ ← (ˆ aθ − at)/(1 − t) 

> 10:

LFM ← ∥ uθ − (a1 − a0)∥2 

> 11:

LQ ← − Qϕ(s, ˆaθ ) 

> 12:

θ ← θ − ηθ ∇θ

 αLFM + LQ

 

> 13:

Update target networks via Polyak averaging  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

return θAlgorithm 2 Inference with VGFM Policy πθ 

> 1:

procedure πθ (s) ▷ Induced policy via ˆaθ 

> 2:

x0 ∼ N (0 , I ), τ ← 0 

> 3:

for T steps do  

> 4:

ˆu ← (ˆ aθ (s, x 0, τ ) − x0)/(1 − τ ) 

> 5:

x0 ← x0 + ˆ u/T  

> 6:

τ ← τ + 1 /T  

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

return x0 

> 9:

end procedure 

Training, as detailed in Algorithm 1, proceeds by iterative critic updates and policy updates using the objectives in Eq. (16) and Eq. (15) respectively. At each policy update, we sample states and actions from D, base samples from p0, and flow times uniformly from [0 , 1] , then jointly minimize LFM 

and LQ via standard gradient descent. At inference time, actions are generated by numerically integrating the learned ODE (Eq. 11) from t = 0 to t = 1 with methods like Euler’s method; the number of integration steps can be chosen to trade computation for performance without retraining. The inference procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2.                   

> TABLE I: Comparison of generative policy methods along three practical dimensions. Method BPTT Inference Scalability Auxiliary Loss DQL [7] Yes Yes None FQL [10] No No Distillation Loss SSCP [12] No Poor Completion Loss SORL [11] Yes Yes Shortcut Loss
> VGFM (Ours) No Yes None

Table I positions Value-Guided Flow Matching (VGFM) against representative flow-based offline RL methods along three axes critical to practical deployment: BPTT require-ment, inference flexibility, and algorithmic simplicity. Prior approaches exhibit inherent tradeoffs: methods avoiding BPTT (eg. FQL, SSCP) sacrifice inference-time scalability by requiring policy distillation or fixed-step completion vec-tors; methods supporting scalable inference (DQL, SORL) rely on backpropagation through time, introducing associ-ated training complexities; and most require auxiliary losses beyond standard policy optimization. VGFM uniquely com-bines BPTT-free training, inference-time step adaptability, and minimal auxiliary machinery, requiring only the flow-matching and value-guidance terms already present in the core objective. IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

A. Experimental Setup 1) Task Details: The selected environments span a di-verse set of challenging robotic control problems in OG-Bench, covering both locomotion and manipulation, and all use flat state representations. We adopt the goal-oriented sparse-reward single-task variants for all experiments. As described in the official implementation [10], [13], each environment provides five distinct tasks, denoted by suffixes 

singletask-task1 through -task5 , corresponding to fixed evaluation goals; we train and evaluate on all five tasks per simulation environment (or task group). The locomotion suite includes AntMaze and HumanoidMaze, which require navigation of quadrupedal (8 DOF) and humanoid (21 DOF) agents through complex maze layouts, as well as AntSoccer, which extends the Ant agent’s locomotion to goal-directed ball interaction. The manipulation suite includes Cube and Scene, both involving multi-DOF robotic arms: Cube fo-cuses on placing cube-shaped objects into specified goal configurations, while Scene requires sequencing multiple subtasks (up to eight per episode). The datasets provide semi-sparse reward annotations based on the number of remaining subtasks in manipulation environments and based on goal attainment in locomotion environments. 

2) Evaluation Protocol: We evaluate VGFM against eight competitive baselines on the locomotion and manipulation benchmarks in OGBench, strictly adhering to the experimen-tal protocol of [10], [13]. Following prior work, we consider the reward-based single-task variants and train each policy for 1M gradient steps, with evaluations every 100 K steps using 50 rollouts per checkpoint. For reporting, we adopt the official OGBench evaluation scheme and compute the average success rate over the final three checkpoints (800K, 900K, and 1M). Consequently, each table entry aggregates results over last 3 evaluation epochs × 50 episode rollouts 

× 8 random seeds × 5 tasks, yielding 6,000 runs per task per method in Table II. Although results are presented as eight task groups , each group comprises five distinct single-task environments; consistent with standard benchmarking practice, we train a separate policy per task, resulting in 40 

independently trained policies overall. 

3) Baselines: We benchmark VGFM against a representa-tive spectrum of offline RL methods spanning Gaussian, dif-fusion, and flow-based policy classes. The Gaussian baselines include Behavioral Cloning (BC) [23], Implicit Q-Learning 

(IQL) [24], and ReBRAC [25]. Diffusion-based methods comprise Implicit Diffusion Q-Learning (IDQL) [26], and 

Consistency Actor-Critic (CAC) [19]. Finally, we consider flow-based approaches, including Implicit Flow Q-Learning 

(IFQL) [26], [10], Flow Q-Learning (FQL) [10], and SORL [11]. Results for all baselines except SORL are taken from [10], which provides extensively tuned and standardized OGBench evaluations; SORL results are from the original publication. This consolidated setup enables a rigorous and carefully controlled empirical comparison across modeling paradigms. 

B. OGBench Results 

Under this statistically rigorous protocol, VGFM achieves the best or near-best performance on the majority of task groups in OGBench suite, as summarized in Table II. Across this standardized large-scale benchmark spanning forty dif-ferent robotic manipulation and locomotion tasks, VGFM consistently matches or surpasses established offline RL baselines, demonstrating strong performance across diverse 0.0 0.5 1.0 Training Steps 1e6             

> 020 40 60 80 Score
> Antmaze Large Antmaze Giant (a) Antmaze Large and Giant 0.0 0.5 1.0 Training Steps 1e6
> 020 40 60 80 Score
> Humanoid Medium Humanoid Large (b) Humanoid Medium and Large 0.0 0.5 1.0 Training Steps 1e6
> 020 40 60 80 100 Score  Cube Single Cube Double (c) Cube Single and Double 0.0 0.5 1.0 Training Steps 1e6
> 020 40 60 Score
> Ant Soccer Scene Play (d) Ant Soccer and Scene Play

Fig. 2: Training curves of VGFM for all 8 OGBench task groups. Plots show normalized return versus gradient steps. Solid lines denote mean performance over 8 random training seeds; shaded regions indicate ± one standard deviation. 

task families. Fig. 2 further presents the full training curves for all eight task groups, reporting normalized return (y-axis) versus gradient steps (x-axis). Curves show the mean over 8 random seeds, with shaded regions indicating ± one standard deviation. Beyond strong final performance, the training curves illustrate generally consistent improvement trends over training steps and stable learning dynamics across task groups. Collectively, these results support VGFM as an effective general-purpose approach for learning expressive policies in long-horizon robotic tasks. 

1) Hyperparameters: We fix all architectural and opti-mization settings across tasks and tune only a single coeffi-cient, α, in Eq. (15) (also see Algorithm 1). This coefficient balances the policy optimization objective and behavior cloning regularization, similar in spirit to DDPG+BC-style methods, where the relative weighting between Q-loss and BC loss must be carefully tuned. In contrast to several recent approaches that introduce additional auxiliary objec-tives (e.g., distillation or shortcut losses), which might often require extra weighting coefficients, VGFM relies solely on a single parameter, α, thereby avoiding additional hy-perparameter interactions and increased training complexity. Moreover, inference-time compute can be adjusted via the discretization step count T (Sec. IV-B.2) without retraining. Key hyperparameters are shared across all tasks: both actor and critic use trunk networks of size (512 , 512 , 512 , 512) ,with learning rate 3 × 10 −4 and batch size 256 . The only task-specific tuning concerns the coefficient α in Eq. (15). For the results reported in Table II, we use α = 5 for Ant 

tasks (all large , giant , and AntSoccer ), α = 10 for 

HumanoidMaze (both medium and large ), α = 500 for 

Cube-Single , α = 50 for Cube-Double , and α = 50 

for Scene-Play .Figure 3 analyzes inference-time scalability in VGFM by varying the number of Euler integration steps used to solve the flow ODE during policy inference. Specifically, we vary the number of discretization steps T ∈ { 1, 2, 5, 10 } (from a total range of 1 to 10) in Algorithm 2, corresponding to progressively finer discretizations of the interval [0 , 1] .Importantly, the same trained model is used for all values of 

T without retraining, demonstrating purely test-time scaling of compute. 

2) Inference-time Scalability: We evaluate this effect across three representative OGBench task groups. In most environments, increasing the number of inference steps improves the average task success rate, indicating that additional test-time compute enhances policy expressivity and control precision. This demonstrates a favorable com-pute–performance trade-off for our flow-based generative policies, as multi-step inference requires multiple function evaluations. In practice, however, the wall-clock overhead is not proportional to the required additional number of evaluations as Euler steps increases. Instead, the average inference time is comparable to the single-step generation baseline FQL, as shown in Fig. 4. Thus, finer flow discretiza-tion yields consistent performance gains while incurring only 

TABLE II: OGBench Offline RL results. For each task group, we highlight the highest-performing score with boldface and additionally bold any method whose performance is within 95% of the best. VGFM achieves the best or near-best performance on most of the OGBench robotic locomotion and manipulation tasks. 

Gaussian Policies Generative Policies Task Category BC IQL ReBRAC IDQL CAC IFQL FQL SORL VGFM antmaze-large-singletask (5 tasks) 11 ±1 53 ±3 81 ±5 21 ±5 33 ±4 28 ±5 79 ±3 89 ±2 87 ±1

antmaze-giant-singletask (5 tasks) 0 ±0 4 ±1 26 ±8 0 ±0 0 ±0 3 ±2 9 ±6 9 ±6 23 ±9

humanoidmaze-medium-singletask (5 tasks) 2 ±1 33 ±2 22 ±8 1 ±0 53 ±8 60 ±14 58 ±5 64 ±4 73 ±8

humanoidmaze-large-singletask (5 tasks) 1 ±0 2 ±1 2 ±1 1 ±0 0 ±0 11 ±2 4 ±2 5 ±2 9 ±3

antsoccer-arena-singletask ( 5 tasks) 1 ±0 8 ±2 0 ±0 12 ±4 2 ±4 33 ±6 60 ±2 69 ±2 39 ±2

cube-single-singletask (5 tasks) 5 ±1 83 ±3 91 ±2 95 ±2 85 ±9 79 ±2 96 ±1 97 ±1 99 ±1

cube-double-singletask (5 tasks) 2 ±1 7 ±1 12 ±1 15 ±6 6 ±2 14 ±3 29 ±2 25 ±3 29 ±3

scene-singletask ( 5 tasks) 5 ±1 28 ±1 41 ±3 46 ±3 40 ±7 30 ±3 56 ±2 57 ±2 58 ±21 2 5 10 Inference Steps ( T)40 60 80 Score 

AntMaze-Large HumanoidMaze-Medium Scene-Play Fig. 3: Task success vs. Euler steps T during policy inference. Multi-step flow integration improves control precision and long-horizon task performance in OGBench robotics environments, positioning VGFM as an expressive inference-time scalable method. 

marginal additional runtime in our implementation, enabling practical test-time scaling. As a practical compromise between inference cost and performance, we adopt T = 5 as the default inference setting (except for Cube-Single , where we use T = 2 ). This choice corresponds to the results presented in table II, and also aligns with recent findings emphasizing the role of expressive multi-step inference in OGBench-style long-horizon tasks [11]. Notably, while several recent multi-step generative policy methods also demonstrate inference-time scalability in offline RL, many require backpropagation through time (BPTT) during training. In contrast, VGFM achieves scalable inference without BPTT, as summarized in Table I, which compares generative policy methods along three practical dimensions: BPTT requirement, inference scalability, and reliance on auxiliary policy losses. VGFM offers a simple yet effective design across these axes. 1 2 5 10 Inference Steps ( T)0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Inference Time (ms) 

FQL VGFM (ours) 

Fig. 4: Inference cost vs. discretization level T . Despite improved perfor-mance at larger inference steps T , VGFM incurs near-constant wall-clock cost, comparable to single-step FQL (all evaluations done on an NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU). 

V. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we present VGFM, a flow-based gener-ative policy framework for offline reinforcement learning. Across a rigorous evaluation on OGBench, VGFM achieves competitive or state-of-the-art performance on diverse loco-motion and manipulation tasks under a standardized large-scale protocol. Beyond strong aggregate results, VGFM sup-ports inference-time scalability through adjustable ODE dis-cretization, enabling test-time compute–performance trade-offs without retraining. The method maintains minimal train-ing complexity by tuning only a single task-specific coeffi-cient and avoids BPTT, distinguishing it from several recent multi-step generative approaches. Overall, VGFM provides a simple, scalable, and effective framework for learning expressive policies in long-horizon robotic control. REFERENCES [1] S. Levine, A. Kumar, G. Tucker, and J. Fu, “Offline reinforcement learning: Tutorial, review, and perspectives on open problems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643 , 2020. [2] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchfiel, R. Tedrake, and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action diffusion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.04137 , 2023. [3] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli, “Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics,” in International conference on machine learning . pmlr, 2015, pp. 2256–2265. [4] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020. [5] X. Liu, C. Gong, and Q. Liu, “Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03003 , 2022. [6] Y. Lipman, R. T. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le, “Flow matching for generative modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02747 ,2022. [7] Z. Wang, J. J. Hunt, and M. Zhou, “Diffusion policies as an expres-sive policy class for offline reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06193 , 2022. [8] Y. Zheng, R. Liang, K. Zheng, J. Zheng, L. Mao, J. Li, W. Gu, R. Ai, S. E. Li, X. Zhan et al. , “Diffusion-based planning for autonomous driving with flexible guidance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.15564 ,2025. [9] S. Fujimoto, D. Meger, and D. Precup, “Off-policy deep reinforcement learning without exploration,” in International conference on machine learning . PMLR, 2019, pp. 2052–2062. [10] S. Park, Q. Li, and S. Levine, “Flow q-learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02538 , 2025. [11] N. Espinosa-Dice, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, B. Guo, O. Oertell, G. Swamy, K. Brantley, and W. Sun, “Scaling offline rl via efficient and expressive shortcut models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22866 , 2025. [12] P. Koirala and C. Fleming, “Flow-based single-step comple-tion for efficient and expressive policy learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21427 , 2025. [13] S. Park, K. Frans, B. Eysenbach, and S. Levine, “Ogbench: Bench-marking offline goal-conditioned rl,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.20092 ,2024. [14] A. Kumar, A. Zhou, G. Tucker, and S. Levine, “Conservative q-learning for offline reinforcement learning,” Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 1179–1191, 2020. [15] S. Fujimoto and S. S. Gu, “A minimalist approach to offline reinforce-ment learning,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,vol. 34, pp. 20 132–20 145, 2021. [16] Y. Wu, G. Tucker, and O. Nachum, “Behavior regularized offline reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.11361 , 2019. [17] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Ermon, and B. Poole, “Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13456 , 2020. [18] X. B. Peng, A. Kumar, G. Zhang, and S. Levine, “Advantage-weighted regression: Simple and scalable off-policy reinforcement learning,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.00177 , 2019. [19] Z. Ding and C. Jin, “Consistency models as a rich and efficient policy class for reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16984 ,2023. [20] H. Chen, C. Lu, Z. Wang, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “Score regular-ized policy optimization through diffusion behavior,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07297 , 2023. [21] D. Ki, H.-J. Ahn, K. Kim, and B.-J. Lee, “Actor-critic without actor,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.21022 , 2025. [22] T. Li and K. He, “Back to basics: Let denoising generative models denoise,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.13720 , 2025. [23] D. A. Pomerleau, “Alvinn: An autonomous land vehicle in a neural network,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 1, 1988. [24] I. Kostrikov, A. Nair, and S. Levine, “Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06169 , 2021. [25] D. Tarasov, V. Kurenkov, A. Nikulin, and S. Kolesnikov, “Revisiting the minimalist approach to offline reinforcement learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, pp. 11 592–11 620, 2023. [26] P. Hansen-Estruch, I. Kostrikov, M. Janner, J. G. Kuba, and S. Levine, “Idql: Implicit q-learning as an actor-critic method with diffusion policies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10573 , 2023.