Title: Walking the Score Manifold: Continuous-time Generative Dynamics on Learned Data Manifolds

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.17901v1

Published Time: Thu, 17 Sep 2026 00:27:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 51

Markdown Content:
# WALKING THE SCORE MANIFOLD : C ONTINUOUS -TIME 

# GENERATIVE DYNAMICS ON LEARNED DATA MANI -

# FOLDS 

Jan Tauberschmidt 1,2 Brian B. Moser 1 Stanislav Frolov 1 Andreas Dengel 1,2

Andrew B. Duncan 3 Sebastian J. Vollmer 1,21DFKI Kaiserslautern 2RPTU Kaiserslautern 3Imperial College London 

# ABSTRACT 

Generative modeling of time-dependent data is typically formulated on a discrete temporal grid, restricting supervision to the observed timestamps in the training data. We instead frame generation as continuous-time evolution on a learned data manifold. To this end, we leverage pretrained score-based models as geometric priors and learn a vector field that evolves data along score-induced interpolation paths. Because these dynamics follow transitions that respect the geometry learned by the score model, they support generation at arbitrary timestamps and temporal super-resolution beyond the discretization of the training data. Moreover, this geometric formulation allows us to train the vector field simulation-free through a regression objective. To improve long-horizon rollout robustness, we introduce an objective that promotes path-relative transverse exponential stability. While motivated by stability theory, it admits a practical interpretation as denoising score matching transverse to the interpolation path. Further, we extend the framework to a probabilistic setting that models a distribution over plausible future trajectories. We demonstrate the method on natural video and scientific dynamical data, includ-ing temporal super-resolution, PDE-based spatiotemporal fields, and molecular dynamics. Our results show that score-based priors provide a strong foundation for learning stochastic continuous-time generative dynamics. 

# 1 INTRODUCTION 

Generative models of time-dependent data are commonly formulated on a fixed temporal grid (Ho et al., 2022; Singer et al., 2023; Harvey et al., 2022). This discretization is natural for training, since observations are typically available only at sampled timestamps, but it also ties the learned dynamics to the resolution of the data. Continuous-time models, such as Neural ODEs (Chen et al., 2018), aim to remove this dependence by representing evolution through a vector field that can be queried at arbitrary times (see also Rubanova et al., 2019; Kidger et al., 2020; Park et al., 2021; Gordon & Parde, 2021). However, even in these models, supervision still enters only at the observed timestamps of the training data. This raises a central question for continuous-time generative dynamics: how should the state evolve between observed time points? A continuous-time parameterization alone does not answer this. Without additional structure, intermediate states are constrained only indirectly by the data, and simple Euclidean paths—including the linear interpolants used in many transport-based objectives—can pass through implausible off-manifold regions (Lipman et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Liu & Ritschel, 2025). We argue that intermediate-time evolution should instead be guided by a learned prior. Recent work has shown that score-based models encode nontrivial geometric information about data manifolds, and that this geometry can be used to define manifold-aware, geodesic-like interpolations rather than sim-ple Euclidean straight lines (Stanczuk et al., 2024; Diepeveen et al., 2025; Park et al., 2023; De Bortoli et al., 2022; Saito & Matsubara, 2025; Kapu´ sniak et al., 2024). This suggests a different perspective on generative modeling: rather than treating temporal generation as repeated discrete synthesis, we frame it as walking the score manifold in continuous time . The score-based prior provides a learned local geometry, while the learned dynamics determine how to evolve along this geometry over time. 1arXiv:2609.17901v1 [cs.LG] 15 Sep 2026 In this work, we propose a stochastic continuous-time generative dynamics framework based on this principle. Conditioned on an observed history, our model learns a vector field in data space. Its tangential component evolves states along score-induced interpolation paths, while its transverse component performs denoising score matching, encouraging the dynamics to remain close to states that are plausible under the prior. This yields continuous-time evolution that respects the learned geometry, supports generation at arbitrary timestamps and temporal super-resolution beyond the discretization of the training data, and enables simulation-free learning through local regression targets. The probabilistic formulation further allows the model to represent distributions over plausible future trajectories. We demonstrate the resulting framework on natural video and scientific dynamical data, including temporal super-resolution, spatiotemporal fields governed by partial differential equations (PDEs), and molecular dynamics. Our main contributions are: 1) We formulate time-dependent generative modeling as latent-conditioned continuous-time evolution on a score-induced manifold, enabling arbitrary-time genera-tion from discrete observations. 2) We derive a simulation-free velocity-matching objective by using score-induced interpolation paths as local evolution targets, with a CVAE likelihood interpretation for stochastic futures. 3) We introduce a path-relative transverse robustness objective that corresponds to exponential return toward the interpolation path and admits a denoising-score-matching interpretation. 

# 2 SCORE -BASED MODELS AS INTERPOLATION PRIORS 

Score-based generative models are trained to approximate the score function, i.e. the gradient of the log-density of the data distribution. Beyond their generative capabilities, recent work has shown that the score function encodes nontrivial geometric information about the data manifold. This includes its intrinsic dimensionality as well as its local tangent or normal structure and associated Riemannian geometry (Stanczuk et al., 2024; Diepeveen et al., 2025; Park et al., 2023; De Bortoli et al., 2022; Chen & Lipman, 2024; Saito & Matsubara, 2025). A more detailed review of relevant background is provided in Appendix B. In particular, score-based models can be used to define a Riemannian metric G(x). Since the score geometry is not generally well behaved at the clean-data limit, we evaluate the metric at a small positive noise level rather than directly on the data space. For notational simplicity, we suppress this distinction in the main text and defer the precise construction to Appendix B. As one concrete option, we follow Saito & Matsubara (2025) and define G(x) = JTx Jx + λGI through the Jacobian of the score Jx. This metric will be used to interpolate between two data points x0 and x1 through a geodesic construction, which means to find a path γ∗ that minimizes the metric-induced path length 

γ∗ = arg min 

> γ

Z 10

∥ ˙γt∥G(γt) dt, (1) subject to γ0 = x0 and γ1 = x1. Solving equation 1 online during training would be expensive and may yield inconsistent targets (Chen & Lipman, 2024; Saito & Matsubara, 2025). We therefore use an amortized interpolation map that can be evaluated efficiently and reused throughout training. To this end, Kapu´ sniak et al. (2024) propose to learn a neural bridging correction term φ that augments linear interpolation: 

γt(x0, x 1) = (1 − t)x0 + tx 1 + t(1 − t) φ(x0, x 1, t ). (2) The correction term is trained to approximate the resulting score-induced geodesic γ∗ under the metric G by minimizing metric energy. Details of the training can be found in Appendix B.5. Once trained, φ allows for fast and differentiable interpolation and effectively yields an interpolation prior that respects the geometry encoded by the score model. Beyond the geometry, the energy objective also fixes how the path is traversed. With Len G(γ) the met-ric length minimized in equation 1 and βγ : [0 , 1] → [0 , 1] , βγ (t) := Len G(γ)−1 R t 

> 0

∥ ˙γu∥G(γu) du ,the fraction of metric arc length covered by time t, the energy factorizes as 

12

Z 10

∥ ˙γt∥2 

> G(γt)

dt = 12 Len G(γ)2

Z 10

˙βγ (t)2 dt ≥ 12 Len G(γ)2,

with equality exactly when γ has uniform metric speed. A formal statement and proof are given in Appendix B.6. 2Figure 1: Overview. Left: a pretrained score model (grey arrows) induces manifold-aware interpo-lation paths (blue curve). Right: the generative vector field follows these paths tangentially while applying a transverse correction (see Sec. 3.2). 

# 3 METHOD : G ENERATIVE DYNAMICS ALONG INTERPOLATION PATHS 

We propose to frame the problem of continuous-time generation as navigating the manifold of a trained score-based model. To this end, we learn an autonomous vector field vθ (x) such that solving the initial value problem ˙xt = vθ (xt) with xt0 = x0 generates trajectories that follow the interpolation paths induced by the score model. Given a discrete training video x0: K := (x0, x 1, . . . , x K ) ∈ (Rd)K+1 with time steps 

t0: K = ( t0, t 1, . . . , t K ), we obtain an interpolating path γ : [0 , T ] → Rd induced by the score model and interpolator. Each interpolated point is indexed by a unique continuous time t ∈ [0 , T ], and we write xt := γ(t). The interpolating path provides local evolution targets at multiple time scales. We therefore define 

∆hxt := 



xt+h − xt

h , h > 0,

˙xt, h = 0 .

and refer to ∆hxt as the local evolution target. We condition the velocity model on the desired step size and learn vθ (x, h ) to match these local targets. Training is simulation-free, reducing continuous-time learning to local regression along interpolation paths without backpropagating through an ODE solver. At inference time, the h = 0 slice defines the continuous-time vector field, while h > 0 provides finite-step updates for fast rollouts. For fitting a single sample trajectory x0: K ,the natural regression objective then is 

L(θ; x0: K ) = Et,h 

∥∆hxt − vθ (xt, h )∥2.

Here, the expectation uses suitably chosen distributions over sampled time steps and prediction step sizes. All notation is written in data space. However, as is standard, our method can be applied in the latent space of a pre-trained autoencoder without further modification, as we demonstrate on natural video in Section 4.5. Figure 1 summarizes the underlying idea of our model, showing how we leverage the score field of a pre-trained model to obtain a generative vector field. We now extend this idea presented for the deterministic single-trajectory case above into a full generative model. 3.1 STATISTICAL FRAMEWORK 

We model time-dependent data as a continuous-time stochastic process X = ( Xt)t∈T with 

T = [0 , T ] assumed to be almost surely differentiable. We denote random variables using capi-tal letters and realizations or integration variables in lowercase. Directly learning a deterministic vector field is ill-posed when the same history x≤t admits multiple plausible future continuations. To capture this ambiguity, we introduce a latent variable z and model the conditional distribution of local evolution through 

p(∆ hxt | x≤t) = 

Z

pθ (∆ hxt | xt, z ) pϑ(z | x≤t) dz. (3) We assume the conditional independence structure pθ (∆ hxt | x≤t, z ) = pθ (∆ hxt | xt, z ), that is, once z is given, the dependence of the future evolution on the past is absorbed into the latent variable. In this sense, z is drawn once per sequence and captures trajectory-level hidden factors that help disambiguate one particular future realization among those compatible with the observed history. 3Under consistency assumptions, Kolmogorov’s extension theorem provides the existence of a path-space distribution compatible with these local specifications in Equation 3. The generative dynamics, however, follow an ODE driven by a random latent. In particular, this means a process with zero quadratic variation, so the standard machinery for deriving a continuous-time path-space lower bound does not directly apply. Instead, we proceed with a local variational formulation and support the resulting training objective through a discrete-time statement in Proposition 1. For each fixed (t, h ), Equation 3 defines a conditional variational autoencoder (CVAE) model for local trajectory evolution (Sohn et al., 2015). As in learned-prior CVAEs for stochastic video prediction (Denton & Fergus, 2018), we introduce an amortized full-trajectory posterior qϕ(z | x).Since the posterior receives the full sequence, it allows to condition the local evolution on the specific realization given by a training sample. Jensen’s inequality then yields the usual CVAE evidence lower bound (ELBO) 

log p(∆ hxt|x≤t) ≥ Eqϕ

log pθ (∆ hxt|xt, z ) − KL  qϕ(z|x) ∥ pϑ(z|x≤t). (4) We treat the distributions over time points t and horizons h as design choices of the training procedure. Averaging the pointwise bound over these choices gives 

Et,h 

log p(∆ hxt|x≤t) ≥ Et,h,q ϕ

log pθ (∆ hxt|xt, z ) − Et

h

KL  qϕ(z|x) ∥ pϑ(z|x≤t)i

. (5) To obtain the regression objective used for training, we choose a Gaussian likelihood 

∆hxt|xt, z ∼ N  ∆hxt; vθ (xt, z, h ), σ 2I, where we condition the velocity vθ on the latent z and on the step size h. Then, the base minimization objective becomes ELbase (X) with 

Lbase (x) = 12σ2 Et,h Eqϕ(z|x)

h

∥∆hxt − vθ (xt, z, h )∥2i

+ Et

h

KL  qϕ(z|x) ∥ pϑ(z|x≤t)i

. (6) The reconstruction term therefore reduces to a squared velocity-matching objective, while the KL term aligns the full-trajectory posterior with the history-conditioned prior. We now return to the sequence-level likelihood question raised above. For the discrete-time statement, we consider the natural joint model in which a single latent variable drives the full trajectory. Under this model, Proposition 1 shows that the purely local objective also yields a lower bound on the likelihood of the full sequence. 

Proposition 1 (Discretized likelihood lower bound) . Under the fixed discretization setup of Ap-pendix C.1, the lower bound of equation 5 also is a lower bound on the log-likelihood of a sequence 

(xt0 , . . . , x tK ), up to scaling by K and additive constants. A full statement and proof are given in Appendix C.1. 

3.2 PATH -RELATIVE TRANSVERSE EXPONENTIAL STABILITY 

Neural ODE-based generative models suffer from instability, drift, and numerical error accumulation during rollout. In our setting, this issue is amplified by the fact that training is simulation-free: supervision is purely local via the regression objective, without explicitly constraining long-term trajectories. As a result, small local errors may accumulate and lead to deviations from the learned manifold. To address this, we study the ideal geometric structure of a stable vector field around a reference trajectory and then incorporate this structure into the training objective. Let Γ = {xt : t ∈ [0 , T ]} be a smooth reference path. To avoid endpoint artifacts, we assume that Γ is contained in a smooth embedded extension eΓ and work in a tubular neighborhood Uρ of Γ on which the nearest-point projection π : Uρ → eΓ is well defined. For x ∈ Uρ, write e(x) := x−π(x) for the trans-verse displacement. Let τ (π(x)) denote the tangent velocity of the extended path at the projected point, and let Π⊥(π(x)) denote the Euclidean projection onto the normal space at π(x). The full tubular-neighborhood assumptions are stated in Appendix C.2. We define the ideal path-relative field as 

v⋆(x) = τ (π(x)) − λe (x), (7) where λ > 0. Its first term preserves tangential motion along the reference path, while the second term contracts only transverse displacement. Thus v⋆ is the simplest field that follows the interpolation path and returns off-path states back toward it. 4Definition 1 (Path-relative transverse exponential stability) . A vector field v is said to be path-relative transversely exponentially stable with rate μ > 0 if every trajectory yt satisfying ˙yt = v(yt) obeys 

∥e(yt)∥ ≤ exp( −μ(t − t0)) ∥e(yt0 )∥

for all t ∈ [t0, T max ), where Tmax is the maximal time such that ys ∈ Uρ for all s ∈ [t0, t ].By design (Equation 7), the target field v⋆ has the desired exponential-return property. 

Proposition 2 (Exponential decay of transverse displacement) . Under the tubular-neighborhood assumptions of Appendix C.2, the vector field v⋆ is path-relative transversely exponentially stable on 

Uρ with rate λ, up to the possible longitudinal exit time from the tubular neighborhood. 

This is a finite-amplitude, trajectory-relative stability statement. The same construction, however, also implies the standard infinitesimal transverse contraction criterion of Manchester & Slotine (2017). 

Corollary 2.1 (Transverse contraction) . Under the assumptions of Proposition 2, the vector field 

v⋆ is transversely contracting in the sense of Manchester & Slotine (2017). A precise statement and proof are given in Appendix C.3. 

For generation, we will approximate v⋆ with a learned vθ. Proposition 3 shows that approximation errors are well-behaved by comparing transverse contraction at rate λ with transverse field error ε⊥.

Proposition 3 (Approximation error contracts to a tube) . Under the assumptions of Proposition 2, let vθ be locally Lipschitz on Uρ with transverse approximation error 

ε⊥ := sup x∈Uρ ∥Π⊥(π(x))( vθ (x) − v⋆(x)) ∥ < λρ . Then, up to the possible longitudinal exit time from the tubular neighborhood, every trajectory of ˙yt = vθ (yt) starting in Uρ satisfies 

∥e(yt)∥ ≤ exp( −λ(t − t0)) ∥e(yt0 )∥ + ε⊥/λ . A precise statement and proof are given in Ap-pendix C.4. 

We now turn the ideal field v⋆ into a practical regression target for vθ . The stability result above pre-scribes two components: along the path, the model should match the interpolation velocity, and away from the path, the model should apply a transverse correction that contracts perturbations exponen-tially. This construction is meaningful only after conditioning on z, since z must localize the relevant future path. Given a point xt on an interpolation path and a sampled step size h, we perturb it as 

ext = xt +σkη, where σk is a noise scale, ∥η∥ = 1 , and η⊤∆hxt = 0 . Thus η is normal to the tangent when h = 0 and to the secant otherwise. For h > 0, exact decay requires the updated point to lie at distance exp( −λh )∥e∥ from xt+h, where e = σkη. Since this does not determine a unique target, we select the one closest to the uncorrected secant target ∆hxt. The full derivation in Appendix C.5 gives 

e∆hxt = ∆ hxt + c(h, λ )σkη, c(h, λ ) := exp( −λh ) − 1

h (h > 0) , c(0 , λ ) := −λ. (8) At h = 0 , this correction also has a denoising-score-matching interpretation. If the normal pertur-bation is viewed as Gaussian noise in the normal bundle, then the conditional score in the normal subspace is ∇⊥ 

> ex

log p(ex | x) = −e/σ 2

> k

, where ex = x + e and e ∼ N  0, σ 2

> k

Π⊥(π(x)) . Thus, for 

λ = σ−2 

> k

, the infinitesimal correction −λe in equation 7 coincides with the normal denoising score. In this sense, the robustified target combines tangential velocity matching with denoising score matching in transverse directions (Song & Ermon, 2019). Using multiple noise scales σ1 < · · · < σ K , we replace the reconstruction term in equation 6 by 

Lstab (x) = Et,h,k,η Eqϕ(z|x)

∥ e∆hxt − vθ (xt + σkη, z, h )∥2.

Figure 1 illustrates the resulting geometry: the learned field follows the interpolation path tangentially while pointing perturbed states back toward the path in transverse directions. A central challenge in this formulation is that the latent variable z must disambiguate the underlying trajectory. Otherwise, the contraction target may assign inconsistent labels across nearby but distinct paths, collapsing modes by pulling states into the wrong basin. We empirically probe this failure mode in the 2D example of Section 4.1 and further demonstrate stable long-horizon stochastic rollouts in Section 4.4. Overall, our method applies stochastic gradient descent on EL(X) with 

L(x) = 12σ2 Et,h,k,η Eqϕ(z|x)

∥ e∆hxt − vθ (xt + σkη, z, h )∥2 + Et

h

KL  qϕ(z | x) ∥ pϑ(z | x≤t)i

.

5(a) score field (b) ours (c) no correction (d) no noise (e) no latent 

Figure 2: 2D example. (a) Score prior: model samples (blue), score field (gray), candidate nodes (black), active loop (green). (b)–(e) Learned fields vθ (x | z), conditioned on the green nodes. Arrows colored by their transverse component toward (blue) or away from (red) the reference path (black). Here, t, h, and the noise scale index k are typically sampled uniformly, while the noise levels σk are chosen on a geometric grid. Therefore, the complete model consists of a frozen score-based prior, a frozen amortized interpolator, a latent posterior qϕ(z | x), a history-conditioned prior pϑ(z | x≤t),and a step-conditioned velocity model vθ (xt, z, h ). Only the latter three components are trained in the final stage. The full training algorithm is given in Appendix D.1. 

# 4 EXPERIMENTS 

The experimental evaluation of our method is intended to demonstrate feasibility of our concept, potential applications, and to highlight failure modes of unconstrained continuous-time methods. First, we provide a two-dimensional example that already contains every element of problem we address (Section 4.1). The remaining experiments demonstrate applications to PDE-governed fields, molecular dynamics, and natural video, and analyze rollout stability (Section 4.2), the plausibility of generated intermediates (Section 4.3), and stochastic long-horizon generation (Section 4.4). 4.1 DEMONSTRATIVE EXAMPLE 

We construct a two-dimensional example in which the data manifold is a square whose adjacent corners are connected by an inner and an outer arc. Each sequence is a closed loop of length 9

alternating (noised) corners and arc midpoints with the arc chosen independently on every side, resulting in 24 possible branching combinations. Figure 2 (a) shows this setup with samples from the data manifold and one training sequence. The score prior is pretrained on the arcs, while the generative model observes only the sparse sequences (Appendix D.3), testing three properties: 

(1) Manifold. Generation needs to respect the curved arcs between observed points. (2) Stochasticity. 

Branching requires conditioning and a partial history should preserve stochasticity in the remaining trajectory. (3) Transverse contraction. The field should contract towards a unique path, meaning that latent conditioning needs to prevent states being pulled toward the wrong branch. Figure 2 (b)-(e) shows vθ conditioned on the sequence in green and a trajectory generated from this field starting from the marker with the black edge. We show multiple ablations, where all models have learned manifold-respecting vector fields that follow the arcs. The full method’s field in (b) is globally coherent and transports the entire domain onto the conditioned path. Without the target correction (c), and likewise without noise (d), off-path states circulate instead of returning. Without the latent (e) the field contracts but not to a unique path. Table 1: Measured transverse contraction: median pointwise eigenvalue λ⊥ with the fraction of the tube where it is negative and median empirical decay rate of transverse perturbations.                               

> 2D example ( λ= 10 )Navier–Stokes ( λ= 1 )Model med. λ⊥frac. λ⊥<0rate ↓rate ↓frac. contr. ↑
> ours −8.28 0.98 −5.4 −0.90 1.00
> input noise −0.31 0.68 +0.0 +0.00 0.47 vanilla −0.20 0.81 −0.2 −0.13 0.75

6Further results in Appendix E.1 demonstrate plausible stochasticity from partial conditioning (Figure 5 and Figure 6) and the qualitative results of Figure 2 are also reflected in Table 13, which quantifies manifold adherence, branching accuracy, and measured contraction rates for the ablations. 4.2 ROLLOUT STABILITY FROM TRANSVERSE CONTRACTION 

We isolate rollout stability in a controlled reconstruction setting by training on a single synthetic Navier–Stokes sequence (details in Appendix D.5). We compare the full method against two ablations: training without noise, and training with orthogonal noise but without correcting the regression targets, i.e. pure input augmentation. Figure 8 (Appendix E.2) reports the mean LPIPS (Zhang et al., 2018) over a 64-frame rollout under three inference regimes—direct steps with h > 0, fixed-step, and adaptive ODE solving—and shows consistently improved stability with the proposed robustification across solver settings. Qualitative rollouts in the same appendix show an even larger effect: without robustification, iterative errors accumulate and eventually cause severe artifacts. To test the mechanism itself, we extract pointwise transverse eigenvalues λ⊥ around the conditioned path and report empirical decay rates, obtained by integrating a perturbed and an unperturbed state under the same field (details in Appendix D.10). Results in Table 1 verify the desired contracting prop-erties for both diagnostics and confirm the qualitative behavior of the vector fields shown in Figure 2. 4.3 PLAUSIBILITY OF INTERMEDIATES 

Sec. 4.1 already tests whether generation follows the data manifold in two dimensions, and we now ask the same on PDE data. Gray–Scott reaction–diffusion describes interacting chemical species that form spatial patterns. We observe only one species, so future rollouts depend on both the observed and the hidden initial state. For evaluation, we generate trajectories ten times finer in time to obtain true unseen states between two training frames. Each path is scored against these intermediates by relative L2 distance and a spectral plausibility diagnostic (Appendix D.6). Table 2: Frozen interpolation paths against the true fine-time Gray–Scott intermediates (mean ± std over eight trajectories). 

Path rel-L2 ↓ spectral ↓

linear 0.055 ± 0.001 0.471 ± 0.004 ours (score) 0.019 ± 0.001 0.134 ± 0.017 

Table 3: Generative fields at twice the training frame spacing (full results in Appendix E.3). 

Supervision rel-L2 ↓ spectral ↓

ours (score targets) 0.115 0.335 

linear targets 0.177 0.439 Neural ODE 0.060 0.482 

The frozen interpolation prior alone is already 2.9 times closer to the true intermediates than linear interpolation and 3.5 times better on the spectral diagnostic (Table 2). We then train generative fields on these paths at twice the frame spacing, where the endpoints no longer determine the interior, using the same backbone with score targets, linear targets, and a solver-in-the-loop Neural ODE (Ap-pendix D.7). The Neural ODE fits the dynamics of this single trajectory and tracks the true states most closely, yet its intermediates are the least plausible of the three under the spectral diagnostic (Table 3). While recovery of true intermediate dynamics cannot be guaranteed from the score prior alone, knowledge such as a governing PDE can be added to the interpolator. We demonstrate this on a fully 

(a) Ours (b) Linear 0 1 2 3  

> rollout time
> 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 true MD ours linear Neural ODE

(c) O-H bond length ( ˚ A) 0 1 2 3 

> rollout time
> 75 100 125 150 175

(d) C-O-H angle (deg) 

Figure 3: Molecular dynamics on MD17 ethanol: learned dynamics preserve molecular geometry more consistently than linear interpolation, as reflected by the bond-length variation. 7Table 4: Distributional rollout comparison on Gray–Scott: sliced Wasserstein distance normalized by the true-vs-true finite-sample reference (values near one indicate simulator-level variability).                     

> Method T= 16 T= 32 T= 64 T= 128 T= 256
> Ours 1.35 1.23 0.98 0.75 0.75 FNO 5.91 6.03 5.70 5.72 6.49

observed variant that stores both species, such that the PDE residual is computable (Appendix D.8). Results in Appendix E.3 show that the score paths provide a physically better baseline than linear interpolation and that they behave better under subsequent refinement based on the PDE. On this Gray–Scott data, the Neural ODE seems to recover the true path while violating its spectral structure. We demonstrate that on molecular dynamics (MD), which models atoms evolving under physical interactions, it fails at both. Here the intermediate states should stay on the molecular configuration manifold. We use ethanol trajectories from MD17 (Chmiela et al., 2017), atomic coordinates with fixed atom identities, and an EGNN backbone (Satorras et al., 2021). We also add prior knowledge to the interpolator training, encouraging smooth segment transitions and uniform Euclidean speed (App. D.9). Figure 3 compares fields trained on score-guided paths (ours), linear paths, and a Neural ODE on four consecutive MD frames. The true trajectory has small-scale jitter that we cannot recover, but our rollout stays close to the true geometry. While the linear-path field and the Neural ODE fit the data at observed times, they produce impossible intermediate states with bond lengths shrinking to about a third of their true length and large spikes in the C-O-H angle. 4.4 GENERATION OF PDE-G OVERNED SPATIOTEMPORAL DYNAMICS 

The two-dimensional example shows plausible stochasticity under partial conditioning (Ap-pendix E.1). Now, we test this on the partially observed Gray–Scott data of Sec. 4.3, trained on sequences of length T = 64 , where a starting point does not uniquely determine the future evolution since the second species is unobserved. We generate a reference distribution of possible trajectories by resampling the unobserved field for each observed field, and compare it against samples from our model obtained by drawing multiple latents for the same observation. Table 4 reports the sliced Wasserstein distance at each horizon T , normalized by a true-vs-true simulator split (details in App. D.5). At T = 64 the normalized distance is close to one, so our samples sit about as far from the reference set as it sits from itself, and it stays at a comparable level out to four times the training horizon. Rollouts for two latent samples are given in Appendix E.5, showing distinct yet plausible evolutions from the same starting point. To confirm that the task is not solved by a single prediction, we also report a deterministic Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) (Li et al., 2021) one-step predictor rolled out autoregressively, which produces one future per observation. 4.5 NATURAL VIDEO GENERATION 

We evaluate on the KTH Actions benchmark (Schuldt et al., 2004) under the two Vid-ODE proto-cols (Park et al., 2021) at 128 ×128 : interpolation (observe every other frame of a ten-frame window, predict the held-out frames) and extrapolation (observe the first five frames, predict the next five). Ground truth            

> t= 4 t= 5 t= 6 t= 7 t= 8 t= 9
> Vid-ODE
> Ours

Figure 4: Extrapolation on KTH (rows: ground truth with the last observed input framed in green) 8Table 5: Video interpolation on KTH Actions (DVF and UVI quoted from Park et al., 2021).                      

> Method SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> DVF (supervised) 0.954 36.28 0.037 UVI (unsupervised) 0.934 29.97 0.055 Vid-ODE 0.912 33.08 0.049 Ours (linear) 0.890 29.59 0.086 Ours 0.904 31.86 0.090

Table 6: Video extrapolation on KTH Actions (observe frames 1–5, generate frames 6–10).                

> Method SSIM ↑PSNR ↑LPIPS ↓
> Vid-ODE 0.859 29.21 0.125 Ours (linear) 0.869 29.10 0.103 Ours 0.868 29.46 0.099

Unlike the other experiments, the full pipeline here runs in the latent space of a pretrained frame autoencoder, mirroring Vid-ODE’s GRU backbone, which likewise evolves an encoded state. We retrain Vid-ODE with its official code, evaluating all methods with its protocol and metric imple-mentation (Appendix D.4). Figure 4 shows the failure mode that motivates this work. Supervised only at observed timestamps, Vid-ODE drifts off the data manifold with compounding error over the extrapolation horizon. Figure 11 (Appendix E.4) shows the same under interpolation, where its warped intermediates ghost at unobserved times. Tables 5 and 6 report SSIM, PSNR, and LPIPS, with DVF and UVI numbers from Park et al. (2021). Under extrapolation our method surpasses Vid-ODE on all three metrics and remains competitive at interpolation. 

# 5 RELATED WORK 

Neural ODEs and related continuous-time models enable evaluation at arbitrary query times (Chen et al., 2018; Rubanova et al., 2019; Kidger et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020), including visual generation in Vid-ODE (Park et al., 2021). These methods motivate continuous-time generative modeling, but super-vision typically enters only at observed timestamps. Our work instead uses score-induced interpolation to provide intermediate-time targets, connecting flow-matching regression objectives (Lipman et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023) with recent score-based data-manifold geometries (Chen & Lipman, 2024; Saito & Matsubara, 2025). Stability regularizers for Neural ODEs usually encourage smoother flows through generic Jacobian, kinetic, or contractivity penalties (Finlay et al., 2020; Ghosh et al., 2020; Zakwan et al., 2025). Our robustification is instead path-relative, with the exponential return property of Proposition 2 and the contraction consequence of Corollary 2.1. A broader overview is given in Appendix A. 

# 6 LIMITATIONS 

We inherit limitations from score-based models in general, and in particular the ones listed in the data-driven Riemannian geometry literature (e.g. Horvat & Pfister (2024) or Hauberg (2018)). Beyond these, as discussed in the experiments, we cannot guarantee recovery of the true intermediate dynamics, but we demonstrate plausible behavior that accommodates additional knowledge where it is available. Our experiments focus on low-resolution settings and moderate training horizons and scaling the method might require further engineering. Relatedly, the probabilistic formulation uses a single latent vector, which is unlikely to capture semantics at multiple levels. Hierarchical or multi-timescale latents, and improved latent identification under local regression objectives, are important directions for future work. 

# 7 CONCLUSION 

We introduced a framework for generative modeling of time-dependent data as continuous-time evo-lution on a learned data manifold. Score-based models as geometric priors define intermediate-time supervision and turn sparse temporal observations into dense local training targets for stochastic vector fields, yielding a simulation-free objective. We further showed how path-relative transverse corrections provide a principled robustness mechanism with exponential return toward the interpola-tion path. Across natural video, PDE-governed dynamics, and molecular trajectories, our experiments illustrate that score-induced geometry can organize continuous-time generation beyond task-specific architectures. 9ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by funding from the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research (Bundesministerium f¨ ur Bildung und Forschung, BMBF) under grants 16IS24071B and 01IW23005. 

# REFERENCES 

Ricky T. Q. Chen and Yaron Lipman. Flow matching on general geometries. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024. Ricky TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David K Duvenaud. Neural ordinary differential equations. Advances in neural information processing systems , 31, 2018. Stefan Chmiela, Alexandre Tkatchenko, Huziel E Sauceda, Igor Poltavsky, Kristof T Sch¨ utt, and Klaus-Robert M¨ uller. Machine learning of accurate energy-conserving molecular force fields. 

Science advances , 3(5):e1603015, 2017. Valentin De Bortoli, Emile Mathieu, Michael Hutchinson, James Thornton, Yee Whye Teh, and Arnaud Doucet. Riemannian score-based generative modelling. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:2406–2422, 2022. Emily Denton and Rob Fergus. Stochastic video generation with a learned prior. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 1174–1183. PMLR, 2018. Willem Diepeveen, Georgios Batzolis, Zakhar Shumaylov, and Carola-Bibiane Sch¨ onlieb. Score-based pullback riemannian geometry: Extracting the data manifold geometry using anisotropic flows. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Chris Finlay, J¨ orn-Henrik Jacobsen, Levon Nurbekyan, and Adam Oberman. How to train your neural ode: the world of jacobian and kinetic regularization. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 3154–3164. PMLR, 2020. Robert L Foote. Regularity of the distance function. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society , 92(1):153–155, 1984. Arnab Ghosh, Harkirat Behl, Emilien Dupont, Philip Torr, and Vinay Namboodiri. Steer: Simple temporal regularization for neural ode. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33: 14831–14843, 2020. Cade Gordon and Natalie Parde. Latent neural differential equations for video generation. In NeurIPS 2020 Workshop on Pre-registration in Machine Learning , pp. 73–86. PMLR, 2021. Will Grathwohl, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Jesse Bettencourt, and David Duvenaud. Scalable reversible generative models with free-form continuous dynamics. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. William Harvey, Saeid Naderiparizi, Vaden Masrani, Christian Weilbach, and Frank Wood. Flexible diffusion modeling of long videos. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35: 27953–27965, 2022. Søren Hauberg. Only bayes should learn a manifold (on the estimation of differential geometric structure from data). arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.04994 , 2018. Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David J Fleet. Video diffusion models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:8633–8646, 2022. Christian Horvat and Jean-Pascal Pfister. On gauge freedom, conservativity and intrinsic dimension-ality estimation in diffusion models. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,volume 2024, pp. 48710–48726, 2024. Chin-Wei Huang, Milad Aghajohari, Joey Bose, Prakash Panangaden, and Aaron C Courville. Riemannian diffusion models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:2750–2761, 2022. 10 Kacper Kapu´ sniak, Peter Potaptchik, Teodora Reu, Leo Zhang, Alexander Tong, Michael Bronstein, Avishek J Bose, and Francesco Di Giovanni. Metric flow matching for smooth interpolations on the data manifold. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:135011–135042, 2024. Patrick Kidger, James Morrill, James Foster, and Terry Lyons. Neural controlled differential equations for irregular time series. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6696–6707, 2020. Felix Koehler, Simon Niedermayr, R¨ udiger Westermann, and Nils Thuerey. APEBench: A benchmark for autoregressive neural emulators of PDEs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 38, 2024. John M Lee. Smooth manifolds. In Introduction to smooth manifolds , pp. 1–29. Springer, 2003. Xuechen Li, Ting-Kam Leonard Wong, Ricky TQ Chen, and David Duvenaud. Scalable gradients for stochastic differential equations. In International conference on artificial intelligence and statistics ,pp. 3870–3882. PMLR, 2020. Zongyi Li, Nikola Borislavov Kovachki, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Burigede liu, Kaushik Bhat-tacharya, Andrew Stuart, and Anima Anandkumar. Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Yaron Lipman, Ricky T. Q. Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matthew Le. Flow matching for generative modeling. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2023. Chen Liu and Tobias Ritschel. Generative video bi-flow. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-tional Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 19363–19372, 2025. Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and qiang liu. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations ,2023. Winfried Lohmiller and Jean-Jacques E Slotine. On contraction analysis for non-linear systems. 

Automatica , 34(6):683–696, 1998. Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2019. Ian R Manchester and Jean-Jacques E Slotine. Control contraction metrics: Convex and intrinsic criteria for nonlinear feedback design. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 62(6):3046–3053, 2017. Sunghyun Park, Kangyeol Kim, Junsoo Lee, Jaegul Choo, Joonseok Lee, Sookyung Kim, and Edward Choi. Vid-ode: Continuous-time video generation with neural ordinary differential equation. In 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 35, pp. 2412–2422, 2021. Yong-Hyun Park, Mingi Kwon, Jaewoong Choi, Junghyo Jo, and Youngjung Uh. Understanding the latent space of diffusion models through the lens of riemannian geometry. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2023. Yulia Rubanova, Ricky TQ Chen, and David K Duvenaud. Latent ordinary differential equations for irregularly-sampled time series. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Shinnosuke Saito and Takashi Matsubara. Be tangential to manifold: Discovering riemannian metric for diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.05509 , 2025. Vıctor Garcia Satorras, Emiel Hoogeboom, and Max Welling. E (n) equivariant graph neural networks. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 9323–9332. PMLR, 2021. Christian Schuldt, Ivan Laptev, and Barbara Caputo. Recognizing human actions: a local svm approach. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, 2004. ICPR 2004. , volume 3, pp. 32–36. IEEE, 2004. 11 Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, Devi Parikh, Sonal Gupta, and Yaniv Taigman. Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan. Learning structured output representation using deep conditional generative models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 28, 2015. Yang Song and Stefano Ermon. Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Jan Pawel Stanczuk, Georgios Batzolis, Teo Deveney, and Carola-Bibiane Sch¨ onlieb. Diffusion models encode the intrinsic dimension of data manifolds. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML’24, 2024. Ryan Strauss and Junier B Oliva. Posterior matching for arbitrary conditioning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:18088–18099, 2022. Ruben Villegas, Arkanath Pathak, Harini Kannan, Dumitru Erhan, Quoc V Le, and Honglak Lee. High fidelity video prediction with large stochastic recurrent neural networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 32, 2019. Fang Wu and Stan Z Li. Diffmd: A geometric diffusion model for molecular dynamics simulations. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , volume 37, pp. 5321–5329, 2023. Muhammad Zakwan, Liang Xu, and Giancarlo Ferrari Trecate. Robust convolution neural odes via contractivity-promoting regularization. In 2025 IEEE 64th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , pp. 8028–8033. IEEE, 2025. Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 586–595, 2018. 

# OVERVIEW OF THE APPENDIX 

The appendix provides background material, proofs, experimental details, and additional results. • Appendix A gives an extended discussion of related work. • Appendix B reviews the score-induced geometry behind the interpolation prior. • Appendix C contains the proofs and derivations for all stated results. • Appendix D describes datasets, architectures, and training details for every experiment. • Appendix E collects additional results and qualitative comparisons. 

# A BACKGROUND : E XTENDED RELATED WORK 

In this appendix, we place our method in the broader literature on temporal generative modeling, continuous-time dynamics, score-based geometry, and stability. The main text focuses only on the closest methodological neighbors. Here we provide a wider overview of the surrounding research landscape and situate the components of our approach more explicitly. 12 A.1 DISCRETE -T IME GENERATIVE MODELING OF TEMPORAL DATA 

A large body of work models temporal data on a fixed discrete grid. In video generation, this includes recurrent and stochastic predictors that generate future frames autoregressively (Denton & Fergus, 2018; Villegas et al., 2019), as well as more recent diffusion-based and clip-level generators that synthesize multiple frames jointly (Ho et al., 2022; Singer et al., 2023). Other works combine diffusion with flexible conditioning or sequential generation over long horizons (Harvey et al., 2022; Liu & Ritschel, 2025). Despite substantial progress in visual quality and temporal consistency, these methods remain fundamentally tied to the temporal resolution at which data are observed and generated. Intermediate times are typically not modeled as first-class objects, but are instead recovered implicitly through discrete synthesis or simple interpolation. Our approach departs from this setting by treating temporal generation as a continuous-time dynamics problem rather than repeated synthesis on a prescribed grid. This distinction is central in our setting, since we explicitly care about how the state evolves between observed timestamps and not only about the observations on the training grid. A.2 CONTINUOUS -T IME SEQUENCE AND GENERATIVE MODELING 

Continuous-time modeling based on learned differential equations provides a natural alternative to fixed-step temporal architectures. Neural ODEs (Chen et al., 2018) introduced the idea of param-eterizing dynamics by a continuous vector field and solving for trajectories with an ODE solver. This viewpoint was extended to irregularly sampled sequences by Latent ODEs (Rubanova et al., 2019), to controlled temporal signals by Neural CDEs (Kidger et al., 2020), and to generative settings through continuous normalizing flows such as FFJORD (Grathwohl et al., 2019) and latent stochastic differential-equation models (Li et al., 2020). Together, these works establish learned differential equations as a flexible language for modeling time-dependent data in continuous time. Our method is closely aligned with this line in that it also represents evolution through a continuous-time vector field. The main methodological difference is in how the dynamics are learned: rather than training through explicit solver rollouts and adjoint-based optimization, we use a simulation-free regression objective on local targets induced by score-guided interpolation paths. In this sense, our framework combines the representational advantages of continuous-time models with a training procedure that provides guidance at unobserved intermediates and avoids differentiating through ODE solves. A.3 CONTINUOUS -T IME VIDEO GENERATION 

Continuous-time generation has been explored explicitly in video through neural ODE-based archi-tectures. Vid-ODE (Park et al., 2021) uses a latent ODE to model video evolution in continuous time and demonstrates arbitrary-time interpolation and prediction. Related latent differential-equation approaches have also been studied for video generation (Gordon & Parde, 2021). These models are important predecessors because they show that continuous-time parameterizations can be effective for visual sequence modeling and can naturally support flexible query times. At the same time, these approaches primarily change the temporal architecture, not the supervision signal between observations. They do not use a learned observation-space prior to guide interme-diate states, nor do they explicitly construct manifold-aware interpolation targets between discrete timestamps. Our method addresses precisely this gap by combining continuous-time generation with score-based geometric supervision in observation space—either directly in data space or, as in our KTH experiments, in the latent space of a frozen frame autoencoder. A.4 SCORE -B ASED GEOMETRY AND MANIFOLD -A WARE INTERPOLATION 

Recent work has shown that score-based and diffusion models encode more than generative density information: they also capture geometric structure of the underlying data manifold. Riemannian score-based generative modeling and related diffusion formulations connect score functions to manifold geometry and diffusion processes on non-Euclidean spaces (De Bortoli et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022). Subsequent work showed that diffusion models encode intrinsic manifold dimension (Stanczuk et al., 2024), and that the Jacobian of the score can be used to construct a Riemannian metric and 13 tangent-normal decomposition in data space (Saito & Matsubara, 2025). These results provide a mathematical basis for treating score models as learned geometric priors. A particularly relevant line of work studies interpolation under this induced geometry. Metric Flow Matching (Kapu´ sniak et al., 2024) amortizes geodesic-like interpolation by learning a neural correction to linear paths under a Riemannian metric. Our method directly builds on this perspective. Concretely, we combine the score-based Riemannian metric introduced by Saito & Matsubara (2025), which has been shown to produce high-quality manifold-aware image interpolations, with the amortized neural interpolator of Kapu´ sniak et al. (2024). The resulting interpolation prior is then used not as an end in itself, but as supervision for learning conditional continuous-time generative dynamics. A.5 FLOW MATCHING AND SIMULATION -F REE GENERATIVE FLOWS 

Flow Matching (Lipman et al., 2023) replaces solver-based generative training by a regression objective on local vector-field targets defined along an interpolation path between source and target distributions. Rectified Flow (Liu et al., 2023) further emphasizes straightening transport trajectories for efficient generation, while Flow Matching on General Geometries (Chen & Lipman, 2024) extends these ideas beyond Euclidean space. These methods show that powerful generative flows can be learned from local regression targets without backpropagating through an ODE solver. Our method inherits this simulation-free viewpoint, but uses it in a different role. Rather than learning a transport map between static source and target distributions, we learn latent-conditioned temporal dynamics from local targets induced by score-based interpolation priors between observed states. In this sense, our work combines the regression-based efficiency of flow-matching-style training with a temporal generative setting and a learned geometric prior for intermediate evolution. A.6 STOCHASTIC TEMPORAL PREDICTION AND MULTIMODAL FUTURES 

Many temporal prediction problems are inherently multimodal, and stochastic predictors have long been used to address this. In video prediction, learned-prior latent-variable models such as SVG (Denton & Fergus, 2018) represent uncertainty over future frames through latent stochastic variables. In continuous time, uncertainty can be modeled through latent ODEs with probabilistic latent states (Rubanova et al., 2019) or through latent SDEs (Li et al., 2020), which capture stochastic latent evolution more directly. These approaches are closely related to our probabilistic formulation in that they recognize the need to model distributions over possible futures rather than single deterministic trajectories. However, they do not combine this stochasticity with manifold-aware supervision of intermediate observation-space states. Our method fills this gap by coupling latent stochasticity to a score-guided continuous-time vector field, so that multimodal future evolution is modeled together with a geometry-aware prior on intermediate states. A.7 STABILITY , C ONTRACTION , AND ROBUST ROLLOUTS 

A separate line of work studies robustness and numerical stability in learned continuous-time systems. For Neural ODEs, Jacobian and kinetic regularization have been used to control stiffness and improve numerical behavior (Finlay et al., 2020), while temporal regularization schemes such as STEER simplify the learned dynamics and reduce solver complexity (Ghosh et al., 2020). More recently, contractivity-promoting penalties have been proposed to improve robustness to perturbations by encouraging local contraction of the learned flow (Zakwan et al., 2025). At a more theoretical level, contraction analysis provides a control-theoretic language for reasoning about incremental stability of nonlinear dynamical systems (Lohmiller & Slotine, 1998), while control contraction metrics extend these ideas toward trajectory tracking and nonlinear control design (Manchester & Slotine, 2017). Our robustness objective is most closely related to this family of ideas. However, unlike prior regularizers that primarily constrain infinitesimal flow properties indirectly, our method supervises the desired corrective direction relative to a score-guided interpolation path. This yields a path-relative notion of stability that is tailored to the learned manifold geometry rather than imposed purely as a generic smoothness or contraction prior. 14 A.8 SCIENTIFIC DYNAMICAL DATA 

Continuous-time and generative models are increasingly relevant in scientific settings, where data often arise from dynamical systems and intermediate states are physically or semantically meaningful. For PDE-governed fields, operator-learning methods such as the Fourier Neural Operator (Li et al., 2021) provide powerful predictive baselines, while generative transport methods such as Flow Matching (Lipman et al., 2023) offer a general framework for learning dynamics through local vector fields. In molecular systems, score-based generative approaches have been used to model molecular dynamics and conformation generation (Wu & Li, 2023). These application areas motivate our experiments, but they are not the primary source of our method-ological novelty. Our contribution is not a domain-specific scientific model, but rather a general framework for continuous-time generative dynamics. The scientific experiments therefore serve to highlight a regime where this formulation is especially meaningful, namely when the plausibility of intermediate states might matter as much as endpoint accuracy. 

# B BACKGROUND : S CORE -INDUCED MANIFOLD 

This section summarizes the geometric background used to construct the interpolation prior. The key idea is to use a pretrained score-based generative model as a source of local manifold geometry. The score model provides a vector field whose Jacobian encodes tangent and normal directions of the learned data manifold. This induces a Riemannian metric under which geodesics preferentially move tangentially to the manifold (Saito & Matsubara, 2025). Following the metric-flow-matching perspective (Kapu´ sniak et al., 2024), we avoid solving geodesic boundary-value problems directly and instead train an amortized interpolator by minimizing the corresponding kinetic energy. B.1 SCORE -BASED GENERATIVE MODELS 

We briefly recall the flow-matching view of score-based generative modeling and fix the notation used to define the score-induced metric. Throughout this appendix, we use r ∈ [0 , 1] for the denoising time of a pretrained generative model, reserving t for physical time in the temporal data and τ for interpolation paths. The convention is that r = 0 corresponds to a simple noise distribution and r = 1 

corresponds to clean data. Let p0 be a simple base distribution on Rd, typically N (0 , I ), and let p1 = pdata . Flow matching (Lipman et al., 2023) constructs a probability path (pr )r∈[0 ,1] connecting p0 to p1, together with a velocity field ur : Rd → Rd satisfying the continuity equation 

∂r pr (x) + ∇x ·  pr (x)ur (x) = 0 .

A model uψ (x, r ) is trained by regressing to conditional velocities along a prescribed conditional path. In general, one may choose a Gaussian conditional path 

xr = αr x1 + βr x0, x0 ∼ p0, x1 ∼ p1,

with differentiable schedules αr , β r . In the remainder of this section, we use the linear path 

xr = rx 1 + (1 − r)x0, x0 ∼ N (0 , I ),

for which the conditional velocity is simply 

˙xr = x1 − x0.

The flow-matching objective is therefore 

LFM (ψ) = Er,x 0,x 1

h

∥uψ (xr , r ) − (x1 − x0)∥22

i

,

and the population minimizer satisfies 

ur (x) = E[x1 − x0 | xr = x].

For this linear Gaussian path, the marginal velocity field determines the score of pr . Since 

xr = rx 1 + (1 − r)x0, x0 ∼ N (0 , I ),

15 the conditional distribution of xr given x1 is 

pr (x | x1) = N  x; rx 1, (1 − r)2I.

Its conditional score is 

∇x log pr (x | x1) = − x − rx 1

(1 − r)2 = − x0

1 − r .

By Fisher’s identity, 

sr (x) := ∇x log pr (x) = E[∇x log pr (x | x1) | xr = x] = − 11 − r E[x0 | xr = x].

On the other hand, 

ur (x) = E[x1 − x0 | xr = x].

Using x = rx 1 + (1 − r)x0, we have 

x1 − x0 = x − x0

r − x0 = xr − x0

r ,

and therefore 

ur (x) = xr − 1

r E[x0 | xr = x].

Substituting 

E[x0 | xr = x] = −(1 − r)sr (x)

gives 

ur (x) = xr + 1 − rr sr (x).

Equivalently, for r ∈ (0 , 1) ,

sr (x) = r

1 − r ur (x) − 11 − r x. 

Thus the score can be recovered from the flow-matching vector field by a known time-dependent affine transformation: 

sψ (x, r ) := r

1 − r uψ (x, r ) − 11 − r x. 

This relation is the linear-path analogue of the usual score identities in diffusion models. For example, if a diffusion model uses the variance-preserving noising process (Song et al., 2021) 

xr = αr x1 + βr ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ),

then 

sr (x) = − 1

βr

E[ϵ | xr = x].

Thus a noise-prediction model ϵψ (x, r ) defines the score estimate 

sψ (x, r ) = − 1

βr

ϵψ (x, r ),

while a denoising model ˆx1,ψ (x, r ) defines 

sψ (x, r ) = αr ˆx1,ψ (x, r ) − xβ2

> r

.

In all cases, the pretrained generative model provides a score estimate sψ (x, r ) and hence a score Jacobian 

Jψ (x, r ) := Dxsψ (x, r ).

In this paper, the pretrained model is used only as a geometric prior. The score-induced geometry below is defined through Jψ (x, r ), not through samples from the pretrained model itself. A technical subtlety is that the flow-matching transport is trained from r = 0 to r = 1 , where r = 1 corresponds to clean data. For the linear path, the score identity contains the factor (1 − r)−1, and common 16 diffusion parameterizations have the analogous vanishing-noise singularity at the clean endpoint. Thus the score and its Jacobian are not numerically reliable exactly at r = 1 .Whenever we need score-based geometric information for a clean state x, we first move it to a denoising time 

rℓ = 1 − δ, 0 < δ < 1.

This lifting is defined by the inverse flow map of the pretrained model: 

Lift rℓ (x) := Φ ψ 

> 1→rℓ

(x),

where Φψa→b denotes the flow map of 

ddr Xr = uψ (Xr , r ).

We then compute scores and score Jacobians at the lifted point 

¯x = Lift rℓ (x), sψ (¯ x, r ℓ), Jψ (¯ x, r ℓ).

After geometric operations have been performed at denoising time rℓ, we map back to clean data space by applying the forward flow 

Denoise rℓ→1(¯ x) := Φ ψrℓ→1(¯ x).

By construction, lifting and denoising are inverse operations along the learned flow: 

Denoise rℓ→1

 Lift rℓ (x) = Φ ψrℓ→1 ◦ Φψ 

> 1→rℓ

(x) = x, 

up to numerical integration error. Thus score-induced geometric quantities are evaluated on a slightly noisy point on the same learned flow trajectory, where the score model is well-defined and numerically stable. Note as well that lifting and denoising operations are differentiable, since the underlying score-based generative model is typically differentiable. B.2 RIEMANNIAN GEOMETRY 

A Riemannian metric on an open set U ⊆ Rd assigns to each x ∈ U a symmetric positive definite matrix 

G(x) ∈ Rd×d.

It defines a position-dependent inner product 

⟨u, v ⟩G(x) := u⊤G(x)v, u, v ∈ TxU ≃ Rd,

and corresponding norm 

∥u∥2 

> G(x)

:= u⊤G(x)u. 

For a smooth curve γ : [0 , 1] → U , its Riemannian length and energy are 

Len G(γ) = 

Z 10

∥ ˙γ(t)∥G(γ(t)) dt, 

and 

EG(γ) = 12

Z 10

∥ ˙γ(t)∥2 

> G(γ(t))

dt = 12

Z 10

˙γ(t)⊤G(γ(t)) ˙ γ(t) dt. 

A geodesic between endpoints x0, x 1 ∈ U is a critical point of this energy under the boundary constraints 

γ(0) = x0, γ(1) = x1.

Constant-speed length-minimizing geodesics are minimizers of EG.17 B.3 SCORE -INDUCED RIEMANNIAN METRIC 

Following Saito & Matsubara (2025), we define a metric from the Jacobian of the score field at a fixed denoising time. Let rm ∈ (0 , 1) denote the denoising time at which the metric is evaluated. Using the score estimate sψ (·, r m) from the pretrained generative model, define 

Jψ (x, r m) := Dxsψ (x, r m).

The score-induced metric is 

Gψ (x, r m) := Jψ (x, r m)⊤Jψ (x, r m).

For a tangent vector u ∈ Rd, the induced quadratic form is 

∥u∥2  

> Gψ(x,r m)

= u⊤Gψ (x, r m)u = ∥Jψ (x, r m)u∥22.

Since Gψ (x, r m) is positive semidefinite by construction, it need not be strictly positive definite. If a nondegenerate Riemannian metric is required, one may use the Tikhonov-regularized metric 

Gψ,ε (x, r m) := Gψ (x, r m) + εI, ε > 0.

Following Saito & Matsubara (2025), we found this regularization to have little practical effect and therefore use the unregularized score-induced metric in our experiments. The geometric interpretation is that the score varies slowly along directions tangent to the learned data manifold and rapidly along directions normal to it. Thus, directions u for which ∥Jψ (x, r m)u∥2

is small are treated as approximately tangent, while directions with large ∥Jψ (x, r m)u∥2 are treated as approximately normal. The metric therefore assigns low cost to tangent motion and high cost to normal motion, encouraging paths to remain tangent to the score-induced data manifold. Since clean data points lie at r = 1 , whereas the metric is evaluated at rm < 1, we first lift a clean point x to denoising time rm using the learned inverse flow, 

¯x = Lift rm (x) = Φ ψ 

> 1→rm

(x).

All geometric quantities associated with a clean state x are therefore evaluated at its lifted counter-part ¯x:

Gclean  

> ψ

(x) := Gψ (¯ x, r m) = Gψ



Φψ 

> 1→rm

(x), r m



.

The quantity Gclean  

> ψ

(x) = Gψ (Lift rm (x), r m) is therefore not itself a metric tensor on clean data space. A metric on clean data space could instead be induced by pulling Gψ back through the lifting map. B.4 GEODESICS ON THE SCORE MANIFOLD 

Given two clean endpoint states x0, x 1 ∈ Rd, we define their score-induced interpolation by per-forming the geometric construction at the fixed denoising time rm < 1. We therefore first lift the endpoints using the pretrained flow, 

¯x0 = Lift rm (x0), ¯x1 = Lift rm (x1),

and perform the geometric computation in the lifted space. For a lifted path (¯ γt)t∈[0 ,1] , define the pointwise metric energy density 

eG(¯ γt, ˙¯γt) := 12 ∥ ˙¯γt∥2 

> G(¯ γt)

= 12 ∥J¯γt ˙¯γt∥22,

where J¯γt = Dxsψ (x, r m)|x=¯ γt . The corresponding metric energy is 

EG(¯ γ) := 

Z 10

eG(¯ γt, ˙¯γt) dt = 12

Z 10

∥ ˙¯γt∥2 

> G(¯ γt)

dt. 

Equivalently, using G(¯ γt) = J⊤ 

> ¯γt

J¯γt ,

EG(¯ γ) = 12

Z 10

∥J¯γt ˙¯γt∥22 dt. 

18 The score-induced geodesic between the lifted endpoints ¯x0 and ¯x1 is the path 

¯γ⋆ ∈ argmin 

> ¯γ

EG(¯ γ) subject to ¯γ0 = ¯ x0, ¯γ1 = ¯ x1.

This energy formulation is the squared counterpart of the metric length objective in the main text. For constant-speed minimizers, minimizing length and minimizing energy yield the same geodesic path, up to parameterization. Since normal motion is expensive under G, minimizing EG encourages ˙¯γt to remain tangent to the score-induced data manifold. Thus the induced interpolation tends to move along manifold directions rather than along the Euclidean straight line between endpoints. Solving this boundary-value problem directly for every endpoint pair would be expensive, so we instead train an amortized interpolator that approximates low-energy score-induced geodesics and can later be reused as an interpolation prior. B.5 TRAINING OF THE INTERPOLATOR 

Following the amortized-geodesic idea of Metric Flow Matching (Kapu´ sniak et al., 2024), we learn a neural bridging correction φω that augments linear interpolation in lifted space. Given clean endpoints 

x0, x 1, define 

¯x0 = Lift rm (x0), ¯x1 = Lift rm (x1).

The lifted interpolation path is parameterized as 

¯γωt (x0, x 1; α) = (1 − t)¯ x0 + t¯x1 + α t (1 − t) φω (¯ x0, ¯x1, t ), t ∈ [0 , 1] ,

where α ∈ [0 , 1] controls the strength of the learned correction. The factor t(1 − t) enforces the endpoint constraints 

¯γω 

> 0

= ¯ x0, ¯γω 

> 1

= ¯ x1.

When α = 0 , the path is lifted linear interpolation. During training, we gradually ramp α from 

0 to 1, so optimization begins from the linear baseline and progressively introduces the learned score-geometric correction. For endpoint pairs (x0, x 1) ∼ μpair , we train φω by minimizing the expected pointwise metric energy at randomly sampled interpolation times: 

Lgeo (ω) = E(x0,x 1)∼μpair Et∼U [0 ,1] [eG (¯ γωt , ˙¯γωt )] .

Equivalently, 

Lgeo (ω) = E(x0,x 1),t 

 12 J¯γωt ˙¯γωt

> 22



,

where 

J¯γωt = Dxsψ (x, r m)|x=¯ γωt .

The tangent ˙¯γωt = ∂t ¯γωt and the metric-vector product J¯γωt ˙¯γωt are computed using automatic differen-tiation and Jacobian-vector products, avoiding explicit construction of the score Jacobian. After training, we fix α = 1 and freeze the interpolator. For clean endpoints x0, x 1, the lifted interpolation path is 

¯γωt (x0, x 1) = (1 − t)¯ x0 + t¯x1 + t(1 − t)φω (¯ x0, ¯x1, t ).

The corresponding clean interpolation path is obtained by denoising each lifted point, 

γωt (x0, x 1) = Denoise rm→1

 ¯γωt (x0, x 1) = Φ ψrm→1

 ¯γωt (x0, x 1).

The tangent target used in the main objective is the derivative of the clean path, 

˙γωt = DΦψrm→1

 ¯γωt

 ˙¯γωt .

We compute this derivative by a Jacobian-vector product through the denoising flow. This requires differentiating through the interpolator and through the lifting/denoising operations, which are differentiable because they are defined by the pretrained neural flow. 19 Algorithm 1 Training the score-induced interpolator 

Require: Frozen pretrained flow/score model uψ , s ψ ; endpoint-pair distribution μpair ; metric time 

rm < 1; ramp schedule αn ∈ [0 , 1]  

> 1:

for n = 1 , . . . , N do  

> 2:

Sample endpoint pairs (x0, x 1) ∼ μpair  

> 3:

Lift endpoints: ¯x0 ← Φψ 

> 1→rm

(x0), ¯x1 ← Φψ 

> 1→rm

(x1) 

> 4:

Sample interpolation times t ∼ U [0 , 1]  

> 5:

Set α ← αn 

> 6:

Evaluate the lifted path 

¯γωt ← (1 − t)¯ x0 + t¯x1 + αt (1 − t)φω (¯ x0, ¯x1, t ) 

> 7:

Compute the lifted tangent ˙¯γωt = ∂t ¯γωt by JVP  

> 8:

Compute the score-Jacobian product J¯γωt ˙¯γωt by JVP through sψ (·, r m) 

> 9:

Minimize 12 ∥J¯γωt ˙¯γωt ∥22 with respect to ω 

> 10:

end for 

For finite-step targets, we evaluate the clean path at two nearby interpolation times and form the secant 

∆hγωt = γωt+h − γωt

h , h > 0,

with tangent limit 

∆0γωt = ˙ γωt .

If the original physical interval has length ∆tk = tk+1 − tk, normalized and physical velocities differ by the factor (∆ tk)−1. In the main text, this rescaling is absorbed into the definition of the local target ∆hXt.B.6 UNIFORM METRIC SPEED AND PHASE OF THE INTERPOLATOR 

This subsection states and proves the geometry–phase factorization of the interpolation objective asserted in the main text. We work with a Riemannian metric G as in the preceding subsections. The results apply verbatim to the lifted interpolation family of Appendix B.5 with the score-induced metric evaluated along the lifted path, and we suppress the lift notation for readability. Let γ : [0 , 1] → Rd be piecewise C1 and regular, i.e. ˙γt̸ = 0 for almost every t, and recall the metric length Len G(γ) and the metric energy EG(γ) defined above. Define the arc-length function and the 

phase of γ by 

sG(t) := 

Z t

> 0

∥ ˙γu∥G(γu) du, βγ (t) := sG(t)Len G(γ) ∈ [0 , 1] .

The phase is absolutely continuous and nondecreasing with βγ (0) = 0 and βγ (1) = 1 , and 

γ = ˜ γ ◦ βγ ,

where ˜γ denotes the constant-speed reparameterization of the same geometric image. We say that γ

has uniform metric speed if 

sG(t) = t Len G(γ) for all t ∈ [0 , 1] ,

i.e. if equal parameter increments sweep out equal metric arc length. Under the score-induced metric, uniform metric speed means uniform progress as measured by the learned data-manifold geometry. The Euclidean speed of the same path, however, is in general non-uniform and slows precisely where the metric assigns high cost. 

Proposition 4 (The energy objective factorizes into geometry and phase) . For every piecewise-C1

regular path γ,

EG(γ) = 12 Len G(γ)2

Z 10

˙βγ (t)2 dt, 

Z 10

˙βγ (t)2 dt ≥ 1, (9) 

with equality in the second relation if and only if ∥ ˙γt∥G(γt) = Len G(γ) for almost every t, i.e. if and only if γ has uniform metric speed. Consequently, EG(γ) ≥ 12 Len G(γ)2, and over any family of paths 

20 closed under monotone reparameterization, minimizing the energy is equivalent to minimizing the length and selecting the uniform-speed parameterization of a minimizing image. Moreover, if γ has uniform metric speed with L := Len G(γ), then for every time-warp β ∈ C1([0 , 1]) with β(0) = 0 ,

β(1) = 1 , and ˙β > 0, the reparameterized path γ ◦ β has the same image, the same length L, metric speed ˙β(t)L, and energy EG(γ ◦ β) = 12 L2 R 10 ˙β(t)2 dt . Conversely, every continuous speed profile 

ς : [0 , 1] → R>0 with R 10 ς(t) dt = L can be realized by a time-warp β(t) = 1

> L

R t 

> 0

ς(u) du .Proof. By the definition of the arc-length function, ˙sG(t) = ∥ ˙γt∥G(γt) for almost every t, and hence 

˙βγ (t) = ∥ ˙γt∥G(γt)

Len G(γ) for almost every t ∈ [0 , 1] .

Substituting this identity into the definition of the energy gives 

EG(γ) = 12

Z 10

∥ ˙γt∥2 

> G(γt)

dt = 12 Len G(γ)2

Z 10

˙βγ (t)2 dt, 

which is the identity in equation 9. Since βγ (1) − βγ (0) = 1 , the phase rate ˙βγ has mean one on [0 , 1] , and expanding its squared deviation from that mean gives 

Z 10

  ˙βγ (t) − 12dt =

Z 10

˙βγ (t)2 dt − 2

Z 10

˙βγ (t) dt 

| {z }

> =1

+1 = 

Z 10

˙βγ (t)2 dt − 1.

Since the left-hand side integrates a nonnegative function, this implies R 10 ˙βγ (t)2 dt ≥ 1. Therefore, equality R 10 ˙βγ (t)2 dt = 1 forces ( ˙βγ − 1) 2 = 0 , hence ˙βγ = 1 , almost everywhere. Intuitively, the normalization means the path must cover its entire metric length in unit time no matter how it is parameterized, so every stretch traversed faster than average is offset by one traversed slower. Squaring charges more for the fast stretch than the slow one refunds, and only the perfectly even rate 

˙βγ ≡ 1 avoids the surcharge. By the identity for ˙βγ above, this holds if and only if ∥ ˙γt∥G(γt) = Len G(γ) for almost every t,which is uniform metric speed. Combining both relations in equation 9 gives the energy lower bound 

EG(γ) ≥ 12 Len G(γ)2.The length is invariant under monotone reparameterization by the substitution rule, while the phase factor R 10 ˙βγ (t)2 dt attains its minimum value 1 exactly at uniform speed. Hence, within any family of paths closed under monotone reparameterization, minimizing EG minimizes Len G over the geometric images realized by the family and selects the uniform-speed parameterization of a minimizing image. It remains to prove the statements about time-warps. Let γ have uniform metric speed and let β be an admissible time-warp. Since β is a bijection of [0 , 1] , the path γ ◦ β has the same image as γ. By the chain rule and uniform speed, 

ddt (γ ◦ β)t G(( γ◦β)t)

= ˙β(t) ∥ ˙γβ(t)∥G(γβ(t)) = ˙β(t) L. 

Integrating gives 

Len G(γ ◦ β) = 

Z 10

˙β(t) L dt = L, EG(γ ◦ β) = 12

Z 10

˙β(t)2L2 dt. 

Finally, fix a continuous speed profile ς > 0 with R 10 ς(t) dt = L. The requirement ˙β(t) L = ς(t)

together with β(0) = 0 determines 

β(t) = 1

L

Z t

> 0

ς(u) du 

uniquely. This β is C1 with ˙β = ς/L > 0 and satisfies β(1) = 1

> L

R 10 ς(u) du = 1 , hence it is an admissible time-warp, and it is the unique one realizing the profile ς.21 The interpolation objective of Appendix B.5 is the expectation of EG over endpoint pairs, since sampling t ∼ U [0 , 1] gives an unbiased single-sample estimator of the energy integral. Proposition 4 therefore applies path-wise: training drives each interpolation toward a shortest admissible path under G and , independently, toward the uniform-speed traversal of that path. Because the correction 

t(1 − t)φω (¯ x0, ¯x1, t ) depends explicitly on t, monotone reparameterizations of a fixed admissible image are realizable within the interpolation family, so this selection is effected by the objective rather than assumed. For the flat metric G ≡ I, the unique minimizer with fixed endpoints is the straight linear interpolation traversed at constant Euclidean speed. The trained interpolator thus strictly generalizes the default of standard transport-based objectives (linear interpolation at constant-speed) and reduces to it exactly when the metric is uninformative. When no temporal side-information is available, we argue that uniform metric speed is a neutral choice: it is the unique parameterization determined by the geometry alone, and any deviation from it encodes temporal knowledge that the two endpoint states do not contain. At the same time, the last part of Proposition 4 shows that the temporal profile is a free one-dimensional control, decoupled from the geometry. An explicit monotone, endpoint-pinned family of time-warps parameterized by a scalar function κ is 

βκ(t) = 

R t 

> 0

exp( κ(u)) du 

R 10 exp( κ(u)) du ,

which recovers the identity phase for constant κ. Composing a trained interpolation with such a warp changes only the phase factor in equation 9 and leaves the image, the length, and consequently the tubular neighborhood, the nearest-point projection, and the transverse displacements of Appendix C.2 unchanged. Re-phasing modifies the ideal field v⋆ only tangentially, so the transverse guarantees of Proposition 2 and Proposition 3 are unaffected. Changing the interpolator’s speed, or learning κ

from a temporal criterion such as timestamp side-information or a physics-based residual, is therefore possible without perturbing the learned geometry. 

# C PROOFS AND DERIVATIONS 

C.1 ELBO AND DISCRETIZED LIKELIHOOD LOWER BOUND 

First, we derive the ELBO stated in equation 4. As usual, we augment the local evolution model 

p(∆ hxt | x≤t) = 

Z

pθ (∆ hxt | xt, z ) pϑ(z | x≤t) dz 

with a variational posterior qϕ(z|x) and apply Jensen’s inequality: 

log p(∆ hxt | x≤t) = log 

Z qϕ(z|x)

qϕ(z|x) pθ (∆ hxt | xt, z ) pϑ(z | x≤t) dz 

≥ Eqϕ

log pθ (∆ hxt|xt, z ) + log pϑ(z | x≤t) − log qϕ(z|x)

= Eqϕ

log pθ (∆ hxt|xt, z ) − KL  qϕ(z|x) ∥ pϑ(z|x≤t).

The training objective is formed by averaging over this ELBO, as shown in equation 5. Therefore, we will refer to this as 

Et,h 

log pθ (∆ hxt|x≤t) ≥ Et,h,q ϕ

log pθ (∆ hxt|xt, z ) − Et

h

KL  qϕ(z|x) ∥ pϑ(z|x≤t)i

=: LELBO avg (x).

Finally, to show that our loss can be interpreted as a trajectory-level lower bound in the discrete case, we assume the natural joint model described in the main text. Concretely, we assume the model of a globally shared latent drawn once per trajectory to be given by 

p(x0, ∆0, . . . , ∆K−1) = p0(x0)

Z

pϑ(z | x0)

> K−1

Y

> k=0

pθ (∆ k | xk, z )

!

dz. (10) 22 Proposition 1 (Discretized likelihood lower bound) . Consider the discrete case with a uniform step 

h > 0, grid tk = t0 + kh for k = 0 , . . . , K with xk = xtk , and write 

x = ( x0, x 1, . . . , x K ), ˆx = ( x0, ∆0, . . . , ∆K−1), ∆k := ∆ hxtk = xk+1 − xk

h .

Correspondingly, we consider the case where t is obtained by sampling k ∼ Unif {0, . . . , K − 1}

and setting t = tk. We assume an initial density p0(x0), the model of Equation 10 for ˆx, and xk to be of dimension d. Then, for every choice of θ, ϕ, and ϑ,

log p(x) ≥ log p0(x0) + K LELBO avg (x) − Kd log h, 

where the additive terms log p0(x0) and −Kd log h do not depend on the trainable parameters. Proof. First, we relate p(ˆ x) to p(x) by change of variables. Per factor, we have to account for the determinant of the Jacobian h I d due to the bijection ∆k 7 → xk+1 :

p(ˆ x) = p0(x0)

Z

pϑ(z | x0)

> K−1

Y

> k=0

pθ (∆ k | xk, z )

!

dz 

= p0(x0) hKd 

Z

pϑ(z | x0)

> K−1

Y

> k=0

pθ (xk+1 | xk, z )

!

dz 

= hKd p(x).

Secondly, we can obtain the ELBO for p(ˆ x) as 

log p(ˆ x) ≥ log p0(x0) + 

> K−1

X

> k=0

Eqϕ

log pθ (∆ k|xk, z ) − KL  qϕ(z|x) ∥ pϑ(z|x0)

= log p0(x0) + K LELBO avg (x) + 

> K−1

X

> k=1

KL  qϕ(z|x) ∥ pϑ(z|x≤k),

where LELBO avg reduces to a sum since for the choice of fixed h and discrete values for t we have 

Et,h [f ] = 1

> K

PK−1 

> k=0

f (tk, h ).Finally, combining both statements, we arrive at 

log p(x) = −Kd log h + log p(ˆ x)

≥ − Kd log h + log p0(x0) + K LELBO avg (x) + 

> K−1

X

> k=1

KL  qϕ(z|x) ∥ pϑ(z|x≤k)| {z }

> ≥0

≥ − Kd log h + log p0(x0) + K LELBO avg (x)

Remark. Our proposed objective considers K − 1 additional KL-divergence terms compared with the canonical ELBO for the full trajectory model. This can be related to Posterior Matching (Strauss & Oliva, 2022) and allows arbitrary conditioning, such as demonstrated in Experiment 4.1. C.2 EXPONENTIAL DECAY OF TRANSVERSE DISPLACEMENT 

As in the main text, let (xt)t∈[0 ,T ] be a C2 reference trajectory. We assume that it admits a C2

embedded extension with nonvanishing velocity to an open interval containing [0 , T ]. Let eΓ denote the image of this smooth embedded extension, and let 

Γ := {xt : t ∈ [0 , T ]} ⊂ eΓ

23 denote the compact reference path segment. All nearest-point projections below are defined with respect to the extended curve eΓ, while the estimates are required only in a tubular neighborhood of the compact segment Γ. Let 

τ : eΓ → Rd

denote the C1 tangent velocity field along the embedded extension. Since the extension has nonvan-ishing velocity, the normal projection 

Π⊥(ξ) := I − τ (ξ)τ (ξ)⊤

∥τ (ξ)∥2 , ξ ∈ eΓ,

is well defined. 

Assumption 1 (Tubular neighborhood) . For sufficiently small ρ > 0, there is an open tubular neighborhood Uρ of Γ on which the nearest-point projection 

π : Uρ → eΓ

is uniquely defined and C1. Consequently, each x ∈ Uρ admits the decomposition 

x = π(x) + e(x), e(x) := x − π(x) ∈ Nπ(x) eΓ = Im Π ⊥(π(x)) .

We define the ideal path-relative vector field on Uρ by 

v⋆(x) := τ (π(x)) − λe (x), λ > 0.

We shall use the following elementary consequences of the tubular-projection geometry. 

Lemma 1 (Tubular projection geometry) . After possibly shrinking the tube radius ρ > 0, the nearest-point projection 

π : Uρ → eΓ

is uniquely defined and C1. Moreover, for every x ∈ Uρ and every w ∈ Rd,

Dπ (x)w ∈ Tπ(x) eΓ.

For every ξ ∈ Γ,

Dπ (ξ) = PTξ eΓ,

where PTξ eΓ denotes the Euclidean orthogonal projection onto the tangent line Tξ eΓ. Equivalently, if 

T (ξ) := τ (ξ)

∥τ (ξ)∥

is the unit tangent, then 

Dπ (ξ) = T (ξ)T (ξ)⊤.

Consequently, if n ∈ Nξ eΓ, then 

Dπ (ξ)n = 0 .

Proof. The existence and C1-regularity of the nearest-point projection in a sufficiently small tubular neighborhood follows from the regularity theory of metric projections onto smooth embedded submanifolds; see, e.g., Foote (1984). Since π has image in the embedded curve eΓ, the tangent-map property for C1 maps gives 

Dπ (x)w ∈ Tπ(x) eΓ, ∀x ∈ Uρ, ∀w ∈ Rd;

see Lee (2003, Ch. 3, “The Differential of a Smooth Map”). Equivalently, this can be checked directly in local coordinates. Let γ : I → Rd be a regular local parametrization of eΓ around π(x), so that locally 

π(x) = γ(s(x)) 

for some C1 scalar projection coordinate s : Uρ → I. Then the chain rule gives 

Dπ (x)w = Dγ (s(x)) Ds (x)[ w] = γ′(s(x)) Ds (x)[ w],

24 which is a scalar multiple of γ′(s(x)) , and hence lies in Tπ(x) eΓ.It remains to identify Dπ on the reference path. For ξ ∈ Γ, the projection restricts to the identity on 

eΓ, and therefore its differential is the identity on Tξ eΓ.Now let n ∈ Nξ eΓ. Choose a regular local parametrization γ : I → Rd of eΓ with 

ξ = γ(σ(0)) .

For s sufficiently small, write 

π(ξ + sn ) = γ(σ(s)) .

The nearest-point optimality condition gives 

 ξ + sn − γ(σ(s)) ⊤γ′(σ(s)) = 0 .

Differentiating with respect to s and evaluating at s = 0 yields 

 n − γ′(σ(0)) σ′(0) ⊤γ′(σ(0)) +  ξ − γ(σ(0)) ⊤γ′′ (σ(0)) σ′(0) = 0 .

Since ξ = γ(σ(0)) , the second term vanishes. Since n ∈ Nξ eΓ, we also have 

n⊤γ′(σ(0)) = 0 .

Therefore 

−∥ γ′(σ(0)) ∥2σ′(0) = 0 .

Because γ is regular, γ′(σ(0)) ̸ = 0 , and hence 

σ′(0) = 0 .

Consequently, 

Dπ (ξ)n = γ′(σ(0)) σ′(0) = 0 .

Thus 

Dπ (ξ) Tξ eΓ = Id , Dπ (ξ) Nξ eΓ = 0 .

Hence Dπ (ξ) is precisely the Euclidean orthogonal projection onto Tξ eΓ, namely 

Dπ (ξ) = PTξ eΓ = T (ξ)T (ξ)⊤.

The final claim follows immediately. 

Proposition 2 (Exponential decay of transverse displacement) . Under the tubular-neighborhood assumption, the vector field v⋆ is path-relative transversely exponentially stable on Uρ with rate λ,up to the possible longitudinal exit time from the tubular neighborhood. Proof. We first record the basic orthogonality identity used below. By Lemma 1, for every x ∈ Uρ

and every w ∈ Rd,

Dπ (x)w ∈ Tπ(x) eΓ.

By the tubular decomposition, the displacement 

e(x) = x − π(x)

lies in Nπ(x) eΓ. Hence 

e(x)⊤Dπ (x)w = 0 , ∀x ∈ Uρ, ∀w ∈ Rd. (11) Now define 

V (x) := 12 ∥e(x)∥2 = 12 ∥x − π(x)∥2.

For any w ∈ Rd,

De (x)[ w] = w − Dπ (x)w, 

and therefore 

DV (x)[ w] = e(x)⊤De (x)[ w] = e(x)⊤ w − Dπ (x)w.

25 Using equation 11, this reduces to 

DV (x)[ w] = e(x)⊤w. (12) Equivalently, ∇V (x) = e(x) on Uρ.Let yt be a solution of 

˙yt = v⋆(yt) = τ (π(yt)) − λe (yt),

with yt0 ∈ Uρ. Let Tmax ≤ ∞ denote the maximal time such that 

yt ∈ Uρ for all t ∈ [t0, T max ).

All computations below are therefore made on [t0, T max ).Using equation 12, we obtain 

ddt V (yt) = DV (yt)[ ˙ yt] = e(yt)⊤ ˙yt.

Substituting the definition of v⋆ gives 

ddt V (yt) = e(yt)⊤τ (π(yt)) − λ∥e(yt)∥2.

Since 

e(yt) ∈ Nπ(yt) eΓ, τ (π(yt)) ∈ Tπ(yt) eΓ,

the first term vanishes: 

e(yt)⊤τ (π(yt)) = 0 .

Consequently, 

ddt V (yt) = −λ∥e(yt)∥2 = −2λV (yt).

Solving this scalar differential equation on [t0, T max ) yields 

V (yt) = exp( −2λ(t − t0)) V (yt0 ), t ∈ [t0, T max ).

Taking square roots gives 

∥e(yt)∥ = exp( −λ(t − t0)) ∥e(yt0 )∥, t ∈ [t0, T max ).

In particular, 

∥e(yt)∥ ≤ exp( −λ(t − t0)) ∥e(yt0 )∥, t ∈ [t0, T max ).

Since ∥e(yt)∥ is non-increasing, the trajectory cannot exit Uρ through its lateral, transverse boundary. Thus the solution satisfies the exponential decay bound for all t ∈ [t0, T max ), where Tmax ≤ ∞ 

is the first possible time at which the trajectory exits the longitudinal boundaries of the tubular neighborhood Uρ. This proves path-relative transverse exponential stability with rate λ on its interval of validity inside the tube. C.3 TRANSVERSE CONTRACTION 

For an autonomous vector field v, write 

Av (x) := Dv (x), Av,s (x) := Av (x) + Av (x)⊤

2 .

Definition 2 (Transverse contraction (Manchester & Slotine, 2017)) . A vector field v is transversely 

μ-contracting on a region U if for every x ∈ U and every differential displacement δx satisfying 

δx ⊤v(x) = 0 ,

one has 

δx ⊤Av,s (x) δx ≤ − μ∥δx ∥2.

26 We next show that the path-relative target field v⋆ is also transversely contracting in the standard sense of the preceding definition. The proof uses the same tubular setup and the same notation Γ,

eΓ, Uρ, π, e, and v⋆ introduced in Appendix C.2. Since the reference trajectory is C2, the tangent velocity τ is C1 along eΓ, and since π is C1 on a sufficiently thin tube, v⋆ is C1 on Uρ.We first record a compactness principle that allows one to pass from strict transverse contraction on the reference curve to strict transverse contraction in a sufficiently thin neighborhood. 

Lemma 2 (Persistence of strict transverse contraction) . Let v ∈ C1(U ; Rd), let K ⊂ U be compact, and assume that 

v(ξ)̸ = 0 for all ξ ∈ K. 

Suppose that there exists μ > 0 such that, for every ξ ∈ K and every δ ∈ Rd with 

δ⊤v(ξ) = 0 ,

one has 

δ⊤Av,s (ξ)δ ≤ − μ∥δ∥2.

Then, for every 0 < μ ′ < μ , there exists an open neighborhood W ⊂ U of K such that 

δ⊤Av,s (x)δ ≤ − μ′∥δ∥2

for every x ∈ W and every δ ∈ Rd satisfying 

δ⊤v(x) = 0 .

Moreover, W may be chosen so that v is bounded away from zero on W .Proof. Since v is continuous and 

inf  

> ξ∈K

∥v(ξ)∥ > 0

as K is compact and v̸ = 0 on K, there exists an open neighborhood Wnz of K on which v is bounded away from zero. It suffices to prove the contraction claim for unit vectors ∥δ∥ = 1 , since the inequality is homogeneous in δ.Argue by contradiction. Suppose that the claim fails for some 0 < μ ′ < μ . Then for every n ∈ N,there exist 

xn ∈ U, dist( xn, K ) < 1

n , ∥δn∥ = 1 , δ⊤ 

> n

v(xn) = 0 ,

such that 

δ⊤ 

> n

Av,s (xn)δn > −μ′.

Let ξn ∈ K be a nearest point in K to xn. Then 

∥xn − ξn∥ = dist( xn, K ) → 0.

Because K is compact, after passing to a subsequence we may assume 

ξn → ξ ∈ K. 

Hence also 

xn → ξ. 

The unit sphere is compact, so after passing to another subsequence we may assume 

δn → δ, ∥δ∥ = 1 .

By continuity of v,

0 = lim  

> n→∞

δ⊤ 

> n

v(xn) = δ⊤v(ξ).

Thus δ is transverse to v(ξ). By continuity of Av,s ,

δ⊤Av,s (ξ)δ = lim  

> n→∞

δ⊤ 

> n

Av,s (xn)δn ≥ − μ′.

On the other hand, the assumed transverse contraction inequality on K gives 

δ⊤Av,s (ξ)δ ≤ − μ∥δ∥2 = −μ. 

This contradicts μ′ < μ . Therefore there exists an open neighborhood W0 of K on which the transverse μ′-contraction inequality holds. Taking 

W := W0 ∩ Wnz 

proves both the contraction claim and the asserted nonvanishing property. 27 We now restate and prove the transverse-contraction corollary from the main text. 

Corollary 2.1 (Transverse contraction) . Under the assumptions of Proposition 2, after possibly shrinking the tubular neighborhood Uρ, the path-relative target field 

v⋆(x) = τ (π(x)) − λ x − π(x)

is transversely contracting on Uρ.Proof. We first prove strict transverse contraction on the reference path Γ.Fix ξ ∈ Γ. Since π(ξ) = ξ and e(ξ) = 0 , we have 

v⋆(ξ) = τ (ξ).

By assumption, the reference velocity is nonzero on Γ. Hence 

αmin := inf  

> ξ∈Γ

∥τ (ξ)∥ > 0.

In particular, v⋆ is nonzero on Γ.Let δ ∈ Rd satisfy the flow-transversality condition 

δ⊤v⋆(ξ) = 0 .

Since v⋆(ξ) = τ (ξ) spans the tangent line Tξ eΓ, this condition means that 

δ ∈ Nξ eΓ.

By Lemma 1, 

Dπ (ξ)δ = 0 .

Differentiating 

v⋆(x) = τ (π(x)) − λ x − π(x),

we obtain, for any displacement η ∈ Rd,

Dv ⋆(x)η = Dτ (π(x)) Dπ (x)η − λ I − Dπ (x)η. 

Evaluating at x = ξ and η = δ, and using Dπ (ξ)δ = 0 , gives 

Dv ⋆(ξ)δ = −λδ. 

Therefore, 

δ⊤Av⋆,s (ξ)δ = δ⊤ Dv ⋆(ξ) + Dv ⋆(ξ)⊤

2 δ = δ⊤Dv ⋆(ξ)δ = −λ∥δ∥2.

Here we used the standard identity 

x⊤M x = x⊤ M + M ⊤

2 x

for any square matrix M and vector x, since x⊤M ⊤x = x⊤M x as both sides are equal to the same scalar. Thus v⋆ is transversely λ-contracting on the reference path Γ.It remains to extend this strict inequality from Γ to a sufficiently thin tube. Since v⋆ ∈ C1 in a tubular neighborhood of Γ, since Γ is compact, and since v⋆̸ = 0 on Γ, Lemma 2 applies with 

v = v⋆, K = Γ , μ = λ, μ′ = λ

2 .

Hence there exists an open neighborhood W of Γ on which the transverse λ/ 2-contraction inequality holds. Since Γ is compact and W is an open neighborhood of Γ in Rd, there exists a sufficiently small radius ρ > 0 such that the tubular neighborhood 

Uρ = {x ∈ Rd : dist( x, Γ) < ρ }

is contained in W . After shrinking the original tubular neighborhood accordingly, for every x ∈ Uρ

and every displacement δ satisfying 

δ⊤v⋆(x) = 0 ,

one has 

δ⊤Av⋆,s (x)δ ≤ − λ

2 ∥δ∥2.

Hence v⋆ is transversely λ/ 2-contracting on Uρ.28 C.4 APPROXIMATION ERROR AND TUBE STABILITY 

We now restate and prove Proposition 3. The proof uses the same tubular setup and the same notation 

Γ, eΓ, Uρ, π, e, and v⋆ introduced in Appendix C.2. In particular, we require Assumption 1, and we use again the Lyapunov function 

V (x) := 12 ∥e(x)∥2,

together with the gradient identity ∇V (x) = e(x) on Uρ, established in equation 12 in the proof of Proposition 2. Let ˆv : Uρ → Rd be a locally Lipschitz vector field, interpreted as an approximation of the ideal field v⋆, such as the learned velocity field for a fixed latent and step size. Define its transverse approximation error 

ε⊥ := sup 

> x∈Uρ

Π⊥(π(x))  ˆv(x) − v⋆(x) ≤ sup 

> x∈Uρ

∥ˆv(x) − v⋆(x)∥.

Proposition 3 (Approximation error contracts to a tube) . Suppose Assumption 1 holds and that 

ε⊥ < λρ. 

Let yt be a solution of ˙yt = ˆ v(yt) with yt0 ∈ Uρ, and let Tmax ≤ ∞ denote the maximal time such that ys ∈ Uρ for all s ∈ [t0, t ]. Then, for all t ∈ [t0, T max ),

∥e(yt)∥ ≤ exp( −λ(t − t0)) ∥e(yt0 )∥ + ε⊥

λ

 1 − exp( −λ(t − t0))  ≤ max 



∥e(yt0 )∥, ε⊥

λ



. (13) 

In particular, the trajectory cannot exit Uρ through its lateral, transverse boundary, so that Tmax is again the first possible longitudinal exit time from the tubular neighborhood, and if Tmax = ∞, then 

lim sup 

> t→∞

∥e(yt)∥ ≤ ε⊥

λ .

Proof. All computations below are made on [t0, T max ), where the trajectory remains in Uρ. Since π

is C1 on Uρ and ˆv is locally Lipschitz, the map t 7 → V (yt) is C1 on this interval. We first derive a differential inequality for the transverse displacement. Using the gradient identity equation 12 and splitting the approximate field into the ideal field and the field error, ˆv = v⋆ +(ˆ v−v⋆),the derivative of the Lyapunov function decomposes as 

ddt V (yt) = e(yt)⊤ ˙yt = e(yt)⊤ ˆv(yt) = e(yt)⊤v⋆(yt)

| {z }

> ideal field

+ e(yt)⊤ ˆv(yt) − v⋆(yt)| {z }

> field error

. (14) The first term is the transverse contraction of Proposition 2. The tubular decomposition gives 

e(yt) ∈ Nπ(yt) eΓ and τ (π(yt)) ∈ Tπ(yt) eΓ, so the tangential part of the ideal field is orthogonal to the transverse displacement and drops out, leaving 

e(yt)⊤v⋆(yt) = e(yt)⊤τ (π(yt)) 

| {z }

> = 0

−λ∥e(yt)∥2 = −λ∥e(yt)∥2. (15) The second term involves only the transverse approximation error. The projector Π⊥(π(yt)) can be applied to e(yt) without changing it, because it lies in Nπ(yt) eΓ. Furthermore, the projector is symmetric, so by Cauchy–Schwarz 

e(yt)⊤ ˆv(yt) − v⋆(yt) =  Π⊥(π(yt)) e(yt)⊤ ˆv(yt) − v⋆(yt)

= e(yt)⊤ Π⊥(π(yt))  ˆv(yt) − v⋆(yt)

≤ ∥ e(yt)∥ Π⊥(π(yt))  ˆv(yt) − v⋆(yt)

≤ ∥ e(yt)∥ ε⊥. (16) 29 Substituting equation 15 and equation 16 into equation 14, and then expressing the transverse displacement through the Lyapunov function by ∥e(yt)∥2 = 2 V (yt), we obtain 

ddt V (yt) ≤ − λ∥e(yt)∥2 + ∥e(yt)∥ ε⊥

= −2λV (yt) + p2V (yt) ε⊥. (17) The contraction enters with the square of the transverse displacement while the approximation error enters only linearly, which is what makes the two effects balance at a finite radius. Only the normal component of the field error appears in this estimate. We next integrate equation 17 by a Gr¨ onwall-type comparison. Since ∥e(yt)∥ = p2V (yt) need not be differentiable where it vanishes, fix δ > 0 and set 

uδ (t) := p2V (yt) + δ2 ≥ max  ∥e(yt)∥, δ .

Then uδ is C1 on [t0, T max ), and by equation 17, 

˙uδ (t) = 1

uδ (t)

ddt V (yt) ≤ − λ uδ (t)2 − δ2

uδ (t) + ∥e(yt)∥

uδ (t) ε⊥ ≤ − λu δ (t) + λδ + ε⊥,

where the first inequality uses 2V (yt) = uδ (t)2 − δ2, and the second uses δ2/u δ (t) ≤ δ and 

∥e(yt)∥ ≤ uδ (t). We now multiply both sides by exp( λ(t − t0)) , and obtain 

exp( λ(t − t0)) ˙ uδ (t) + λ exp( λ(t − t0)) uδ (t) ≤  ε⊥ + λδ  exp( λ(t − t0)) .

We identify the left side with the product rule applied to exp( λ(t − t0)) uδ (t):

ddt 



exp( λ(t−t0)) uδ (t)



= exp( λ(t−t0)) ˙ uδ (t)+ λ exp( λ(t−t0)) uδ (t) ≤  ε⊥+λδ  exp( λ(t−t0)) .

Both sides are now integrated from t0 to t. The left side is the integral of a derivative, and the right side is an elementary exponential integral, 

Z tt0

dds 



exp( λ(s − t0)) uδ (s)



ds = exp( λ(t − t0)) uδ (t) − uδ (t0),

 ε⊥ + λδ  Z tt0

exp( λ(s − t0)) ds =  ε⊥ + λδ h exp( λ(s − t0)) 

λ

is=ts=t0

= ε⊥ + λδ λ

 exp( λ(t − t0)) − 1.

The first quantity is therefore at most the second, 

exp( λ(t − t0)) uδ (t) − uδ (t0) ≤ ε⊥ + λδ λ

 exp( λ(t − t0)) − 1,

and adding uδ (t0) to both sides and then multiplying by the positive number exp( −λ(t − t0)) gives 

uδ (t) ≤ exp( −λ(t − t0)) uδ (t0) + ε⊥ + λδ λ

 1 − exp( −λ(t − t0)) .

Letting δ ↓ 0 and using ∥e(yt)∥ ≤ uδ (t) together with uδ (t0) → ∥ e(yt0 )∥ gives the first inequality in equation 13. For the second inequality, abbreviate θ := exp( −λ(t − t0)) , which lies in (0 , 1] for t ≥ t0. The bound just obtained reads ∥e(yt)∥ ≤ θ∥e(yt0 )∥ + (1 − θ)ε⊥/λ , and the two weights θ and 1 − θ

are nonnegative and add up to one. Raising each of the two weighted values to the larger of them therefore gives 

θ∥e(yt0 )∥ + (1 − θ) ε⊥

λ ≤ θ max 



∥e(yt0 )∥, ε⊥

λ



+ (1 − θ) max 



∥e(yt0 )∥, ε⊥

λ



=  θ + (1 − θ) max 



∥e(yt0 )∥, ε⊥

λ



= max 



∥e(yt0 )∥, ε⊥

λ



,

30 which is the second inequality in equation 13. It remains to rule out lateral exit. The initial point lies in Uρ, which gives ∥e(yt0 )∥ < ρ , and dividing the assumption ε⊥ < λρ by λ > 0 gives ε⊥/λ < ρ . Both entries of the maximum are therefore strictly smaller than the tube radius, and the second inequality in equation 13 bounds the transverse displacement by that maximum, so 

∥e(yt)∥ ≤ ¯ρ := max 



∥e(yt0 )∥, ε⊥

λ



< ρ for all t ∈ [t0, T max ).

A lateral exit at a finite Tmax would mean that the transverse displacement reaches the tube radius, so that ∥e(yt)∥ → ρ as t ↑ Tmax by continuity, and the strict bound above rules this out. Hence Tmax is the first possible time at which the trajectory leaves Uρ through its longitudinal ends, exactly as in Proposition 2. Finally, suppose Tmax = ∞. Since λ > 0, the factor exp( −λ(t − t0)) tends to 0 as t → ∞ , so in the first inequality of equation 13 the term carrying the initial transverse displacement vanishes and the factor 1 − exp( −λ(t − t0)) tends to 1, which leaves 

lim sup 

> t→∞

∥e(yt)∥ ≤ lim 

> t→∞



exp( −λ(t − t0)) ∥e(yt0 )∥ + ε⊥

λ

 1 − exp( −λ(t − t0)) 

= ε⊥

λ ,

which is the last assertion of the proposition and concludes the proof. Note that without our proposed correction, i.e. λ = 0 , the same argument yields only 

ddt V (yt) ≤ p2V (yt) ε⊥

and hence the linear-in-time drift 

∥e(yt)∥ ≤ ∥ e(yt0 )∥ + ε⊥ (t − t0).

The corrected targets of equation 8 thus upgrade unbounded error growth to a time-uniform tube of radius ε⊥/λ . Larger λ tightens the tube but stiffens the target field. C.5 SECANT CORRECTION FOR FINITE -STEP TARGETS 

The continuous-time target in equation 7 adds the transverse correction −λe to the tangent velocity. As shown in Proposition 2, this makes the norm of a transverse perturbation decay exactly as 

exp( −λh ) over a time interval of length h. We seek the analogous correction for the finite-step secant target ∆hxt.Without a correction, applying the secant target at the perturbed point xt + e gives 

(xt + e) + h∆hxt = xt+h + e. 

Thus the reference point advances from xt to xt+h, but the perturbation is transported unchanged. The corrected target should instead leave a displacement of norm exp( −λh )∥e∥ from xt+h.This condition does not determine a unique target: it only requires the endpoint to lie on a sphere around xt+h. We therefore select, among all targets with the prescribed decay, the one closest to the original secant target. The equality constraint below is the finite-step analogue of this exact norm decay, measured relative to the secant endpoint xt+h.

Proposition 5 (Minimal finite-step correction) . Fix h > 0, λ > 0, and two distinct reference points 

xt and xt+h. Let 

∆hxt := xt+h − xt

h , e := σkη, σk > 0, ∥η∥ = 1 , η⊤(xt+h − xt) = 0 .

Define the corrected target by 

e∆hxt := arg min 

> v

∥v − ∆hxt∥ subject to ∥(xt + e) + hv − xt+h∥ = exp( −λh )∥e∥. (18) 

Then the minimizer is unique and is given by 

e∆hxt = ∆ hxt + c(h, λ )e, c(h, λ ) = exp( −λh ) − 1

h .

In particular, one corrected step maps 

xt + e 7 −→ xt+h + exp( −λh )e. 

31 Proof. Write the candidate target as the secant target plus an unknown correction, 

v = ∆ hxt + u. 

Since xt + h∆hxt = xt+h, its update from the perturbed point satisfies 

(xt + e) + hv − xt+h = ( xt + e) + h(∆ hxt + u) − xt+h

= e + hu. 

Therefore, equation 18 is equivalent to 

minimize  

> u

∥u∥ subject to ∥e + hu ∥ = exp( −λh )∥e∥.

Set q := exp( −λh ) ∈ (0 , 1) . For every feasible correction u, the reverse triangle inequality yields 

h∥u∥ = ∥(e + hu ) − e∥≥ ∥ e∥ − ∥ e + hu ∥

= (1 − q)∥e∥.

Hence any feasible correction must satisfy 

∥u∥ ≥ 1 − qh ∥e∥.

Consider now the radial correction 

u⋆ := − 1 − qh e = q − 1

h e. 

It is feasible because 

e + hu ⋆ = e − (1 − q)e = qe, 

and therefore 

∥e + hu ⋆∥ = q∥e∥.

Moreover, 

∥u⋆∥ = 1 − qh ∥e∥,

so u⋆ attains the lower bound and is a minimizer. To see uniqueness, equality in the reverse triangle inequality requires e + hu to point in the same direction as e. The constraint fixes its norm to q∥e∥, and hence 

e + hu = qe. 

Solving for u gives u = u⋆. Consequently, 

e∆hxt = ∆ hxt + u⋆ = ∆ hxt + exp( −λh ) − 1

h e, 

which proves the claim. The orthogonality assumption is not needed to solve the minimization problem: the same minimizer is obtained for any nonzero perturbation e. Its role is geometric. Writing s := xt+h − xt, the condition 

e ⊥ s gives 

∥e − αs ∥2 = ∥e∥2 + α2∥s∥2, α ∈ R.

Hence xt is the nearest point on the secant line to xt + e, and ∥e∥ = σk is its transverse displacement from that line. Moreover, since ∆hxt = s/h , the correction is orthogonal to the secant velocity, and therefore 

∥ e∆hxt∥2 = ∥∆hxt∥2 + c(h, λ )2σ2

> k

.

Thus the correction leaves the longitudinal component unchanged, mirroring −λe ⊥ τ in the continuous-time field. This is why finite-step perturbations are chosen orthogonal to the secant rather than only to the tangent: for a curved path, tangent-normal noise can have a component along the secant and would therefore also modify the longitudinal step. 32 The finite-step coefficient converges to the continuous-time correction as h → 0. Indeed, 

exp( −λh ) = 1 − λh + O(h2),

and therefore 

c(h, λ ) = exp( −λh ) − 1

h = −λ + O(h).

If x is differentiable at t, ˙xt̸ = 0 , and the secant-normal directions satisfy ηh → η0, then η0 ⊥ ˙xt and 

e∆hxt −→ ˙xt − λσ kη0,

recovering the transverse correction in equation 7. 

# D DATASETS AND TRAINING DETAILS 

This section provides implementation details for the experiments in the main paper. We focus on choices that affect the training objective, target construction, optimization procedure, datasets, and model classes. Low-level engineering details, such as tensor reshaping, data-loader indexing, and hardware-specific mixed-precision settings, are omitted and will be provided with the released code. All experiments were trained on a single GPU in a shared compute cluster, using NVIDIA L40S or RTX A6000 GPUs with 48GB of memory for the 2D, PDE, and molecular experiments, and a single data-center GPU of the NVIDIA A100-40GB class for the KTH experiments. The full generative-model experiments reported in the paper were trained for at most three days per run. For the 2D, PDE, and molecular experiments, training of the auxiliary flow-matching model and the score-induced interpolator was limited to at most one day each on the same hardware. Each stage of the KTH latent pipeline (frame autoencoder, flow-matching model, interpolator, generative model) trains on the order of one to two days on a single GPU. D.1 IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS : F ULL TRAINING ALGORITHM 

This subsection records how the robustified latent objective of the main text is realized in code. The constant factor 1/(2 σ2) is absorbed into the weight of the reconstruction term, and the interpolation model used to construct (Xt, ∆hXt) is pretrained and frozen during this stage. 

Local target sampling. Training examples are discrete sequences X = ( x0, . . . , x T −1). At each optimization step we sample adjacent endpoint pairs (xi, x i+1 ), a normalized interpolation time 

t ∈ [0 , 1] , and a step size h ≥ 0, so that every batch mixes tangent queries at h = 0 with finite-step secant queries at h > 0. For score-induced interpolation, the frozen prior returns these targets through the lifted-space interpolation and denoising procedure of Appendix B.5, and experiments using linear interpolation call the same interface with the Euclidean linear path. 

Transverse robustness. When the transverse robustness objective is enabled, the query point is perturbed by σkη, with σk drawn from a small set of noise scales and η projected to be orthogonal to ∆hXt, so that the noise probes directions transverse to the tangent for h = 0 and to the secant for h > 0. The regression target is then the corrected target (equation 8) of the main text, whose finite-step coefficient is derived in Appendix C.5. Setting σk = 0 disables the objective and recovers ordinary local target regression. 

KL gradients. In most experiments we stop gradients from the KL term into the posterior parame-ters, while the posterior still receives gradients from the reconstruction term. The KL therefore acts as a prior-matching objective rather than as a force that directly contracts the posterior, which is related to posterior matching approaches (Strauss & Oliva, 2022). The trained components are the vector field and, when latent conditioning is enabled, the two encoders, optimized with AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) and learning-rate warmup. 

Main training hyperparameters. Table 7 summarizes the main optimization hyperparameters and model sizes for the reported experiments. 33 Algorithm 2 Training the continuous-time generative vector field 

Require: Discrete training sequences X = ( x0, . . . , x T −1); frozen interpolation prior; vector field 

vθ ; optional posterior qϕ; optional prior pϑ 

> 1:

for each optimization step do  

> 2:

Sample sequences and adjacent endpoint pairs (xi, x i+1 ) 

> 3:

Sample interpolation times t ∈ [0 , 1] and step sizes h ≥ 0 

> 4:

Use the frozen interpolation prior to obtain (Xt, ∆hXt) 

> 5:

if transverse robustness is enabled then  

> 6:

Sample a noise scale σk and η with ∥η∥ = 1 and η⊤∆hXt = 0  

> 7:

Set eXt ← Xt + σkη 

> 8:

Set e∆hXt ← ∆hXt + c(h, λ )σkη 

> 9:

else  

> 10:

Set eXt ← Xt and e∆hXt ← ∆hXt 

> 11:

end if  

> 12:

if latent conditioning is enabled then  

> 13:

Sample z ∼ qϕ(z | X) 

> 14:

Predict bV ← vθ ( eXt, z, h ) 

> 15:

Compute the KL term between qϕ(z | X) and pϑ(z | X≤t) 

> 16:

else  

> 17:

Predict bV ← vθ ( eXt, h ) 

> 18:

Set the KL term to zero  

> 19:

end if  

> 20:

Compute Lrec = ∥ bV − e∆hXt∥2 

> 21:

Update trainable parameters using Lrec + LKL  

> 22:

end for 

Table 7: Main optimization hyperparameters and parameter counts. Parameter counts refer to trainable parameters in the corresponding stage (vector field plus latent encoders, where applicable). Experiment Stage Batch size Learning rate Parameters 2D example FM model 256 10 −3 215.6k 2D example Interpolator 256 10 −3 215.8k 2D example Generative model 32 seq. 10 −3 2.15M KTH Frame autoencoder 32 10 −4 55.3M KTH FM model 128 10 −4 24.9M KTH Interpolator 128 10 −4 1.78M KTH Generative model 16 seq. 10 −4 28.74M Gray–Scott FM model 128 10 −4 1.78M Gray–Scott Interpolator 64 10 −4 1.78M Gray–Scott Generative model 64 seq. 10 −4 9.21M Navier–Stokes FM model 128 10 −4 1.78M Navier–Stokes Interpolator 64 10 −4 1.78M Navier–Stokes Generative model 128 seq. 10 −4 63.44M Molecular dynamics FM model 1024 10 −4 1.20M Molecular dynamics Interpolator 64 10 −3 735.5k Molecular dynamics Generative model 256 2 · 10 −4 1.46M D.2 IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS : N EURAL ARCHITECTURES 

We use different backbone classes depending on the state representation, and all of them expose the same interface to the training objective, mapping a state Xt, a step size h, and an optional latent variable z to a local tangent or secant target. The low-dimensional trajectories of the 2D example 34 are modeled with residual multilayer perceptrons and temporal convolutional encoders. PDE-valued spatiotemporal fields use a U-Net vector-field backbone with latent cross-attention, together with convolutional–temporal encoders for the posterior and prior. Molecular trajectories use an equivariant graph neural network operating directly on atomic coordinates. The KTH latent-video model uses a related U-Net with spatial-grid latent conditioning, described in Appendix D.4. 

Low-dimensional trajectories. For the 2D data, the vector field is a residual MLP with GELU nonlinearities, into which the step size h and, when enabled, the latent variable z enter through small embedding MLPs that are added to the hidden representation of each block. The posterior and prior encoders are causal temporal convolutional networks over the flattened states, with exponentially increasing dilations, residual connections, and layer normalization, and their context features are mapped to the parameters of the Gaussian posterior or prior over z.

Image-valued spatiotemporal fields. For PDE-valued image fields, the vector field is a multiscale two-dimensional U-Net with a convolutional lifting layer, residual encoder blocks with downsampling, a bottleneck, and a symmetric decoder with skip connections. The step size enters through a Fourier time embedding injected into all residual blocks. Latent conditioning uses cross-attention rather than additive conditioning. The latent vector is projected into a small set of tokens that the spatial feature maps query through multi-head cross-attention at selected encoder stages, the bottleneck, and selected decoder stages, so the image features retain spatial structure while the latent supplies global trajectory-level information. The posterior and prior encoders embed each frame with a residual CNN, using convolutional residual stages, normalization, adaptive spatial pooling, and a linear projection, and pass the per-frame embeddings through a causal dilated TCN. Causality ensures that the prior at time t depends only on available context. 

Molecular trajectories. Molecular states are atom types and three-dimensional coordinates, and the vector field is an EGNN on a fixed molecular graph. Node features are initialized from atom-type embeddings and conditioned on interpolation time and step size through sinusoidal embeddings, and a latent variable, when enabled, is projected to the node-feature dimension and added to all node features. Each layer computes edge messages from source and target node features together with squared interatomic distances, and these messages update node features and coordinates, where the coordinate updates are built from relative displacement vectors, which preserves translation and rotation equivariance. After several message-passing layers, the network outputs either the accumulated coordinate displacement or a coordinate velocity read from the final node features. D.3 DEMONSTRATIVE EXAMPLE 

The square manifold of Section 4.1 is built from two smooth cubic B´ ezier arcs per side, one lying closer to the square and one farther away, which gives the inner and the outer branch. The score model used as interpolation prior is pretrained on noisy samples drawn uniformly from the eight arcs, so it sees the continuous manifold geometry while the sequence model sees only sparse points on closed loops. Each training sequence alternates between square corners and side midpoints and repeats its first point at the end to close the trajectory. Small Gaussian noise is added to the eight non-repeated nodes, and the temporal phase is randomized by cyclically shifting the starting point before appending the closure point, so different sequences can share an initial segment and diverge later depending on the unobserved branch choices. In the experiment, the score-induced interpolator is trained from the pretrained score model and then frozen. Transverse robustness noise uses scales on a geometric grid in [0 .001 , 0.05] with contraction rate λ = 10 . At inference time, we condition on prefixes of different lengths and sample trajectories from the learned prior. The ablation shown in Table 13 retrains the 2D model over all combinations of 

{score , linear targets } × { vanilla , input noise , corrected } × { latent on , off }.

Each of the twelve models changes only the listed components and remains identical otherwise. Linear targets replace the score-induced paths by straight lines between the loop nodes, input noise perturbs the inputs while leaving the targets uncorrected ( λ = 0 ), corrected applies the paper’s target 35 Table 8: Optimization settings of the three KTH training stages. A dash marks a setting that the stage configuration does not specify separately. Parameter counts of the generative model are the velocity field followed by the posterior and prior encoders. Stage 1 Stage 2 Stage 3 Setting Frame autoencoder Score model Interpolator Generative model Parameters 55.3M 24.9M 1.78M 23.35M + 2.71M / 2.68M Training item single frame single frame latent consecutive latent pair length-10 latent window Batch size 32 128 128 16 windows, 2 queries each Optimizer Adam AdamW Adam AdamW Learning rate 10 −4 10 −4 10 −4 10 −4                      

> Weight decay none 0.01 none 0.01 (field, rank ≥2)Schedule 1% warmup, cosine 1% warmup, cosine 1% warmup, cosine 0.3% warmup, then constant Budget 80k steps 120 epochs 60k steps 100k steps Gradient clip 1.0 ——1.0, per module EMA decay 0.999 (used) 0.9999 (used) ——

correction with λ = 10 , and latent-off removes the stochastic framework (both encoders removed and no latent conditioning). All models share the paper model’s data loader and training budget (full nine-node loops as training items, all 1024 loops, 1000 epochs corresponding to 32k steps), with one training run per configuration. Three metrics are evaluated for every model. Off-manifold is the mean distance of a conditioned one-segment rollout to the analytic manifold. Branch accuracy is the fraction of sampled ground-truth loops (random branch configurations) whose conditioned rollout reproduces the full configuration, where each side is classified by the proximity of the trajectory to the central bulge of the inner versus the outer arc. A field that ignores the latent reaches ≈ 1/16 by chance. Rate is the transverse contraction rate measured as in Appendix D.10. D.4 KTH A CTION 

This subsection describes the exact configuration behind Figure 4, Figure 11, and Tables 5 and 6. D.4.1 DATA AND EVALUATION PROTOCOL 

We use the KTH Actions dataset (Schuldt et al., 2004), which contains 25 subjects performing 6 actions in 599 grayscale videos at 120 ×160 and 25 fps. Following Vid-ODE (Park et al., 2021), each frame is center-cropped to 120 ×120 and resized to 128 ×128 . We use the 16/9 subject split of the official Vid-ODE preprocessing, which holds out persons 2, 3, 5–10, and 22 for testing and leaves 383 training and 216 test videos. All quantitative results follow Vid-ODE’s own test protocol and metric implementation verbatim. The evaluation window is the first 10 frames of every test video, and the two protocols read it as follows. • Interpolation observes frames {1, 3, 5, 7, 9} (1-indexed) and is scored on the four held-out frames {2, 4, 6, 8}.• Extrapolation observes frames 1–5 and is scored on frames 6–10 .The three metrics are computed exactly as in the reference implementation. • SSIM on grayscale images, with data range 255, Gaussian weighting, and no sample covariance. • LPIPS with the AlexNet variant on 128 ×128 inputs scaled to [−1, 1] .• PSNR as the dataset-level value 10 log 10 (1 /MSE) , with MSE on [0 , 1] .All predictions are quantized to 8 bits before scoring, which matches the PNG round trip of the reference implementation. D.4.2 STAGE 1: FRAME AUTOENCODER 

All generative components operate in the latent space of a frame autoencoder with a KL-regularized bottleneck (LDM-style AutoencoderKL ), trained on individual frames of the KTH training split. The 36 encoder and decoder use GroupNorm(32) and SiLU ResNet blocks with base width 128, channel multipliers (1 , 2, 4) , two residual blocks per resolution, and a single-head self-attention block at the bottleneck. We downsample with a factor f =4 and use latent dimensionality 32 ×32 ×4, which yields 55.3M parameters in total. Optimization follows Table 8. The loss is L1 +L2 +LLPIPS(VGG) +10 −6 KL , and random horizontal flips with p=0 .5 serve as an augmentation for autoencoder training only. Test-set reconstruction reaches ≈42 dB PSNR. Frames are given to the autoencoder in [0 , 1] and encoded from the unflipped videos with the EMA weights and the deterministic posterior mean . The resulting latents are normalized per channel by statistics computed over these training-split latents. The autoencoder is frozen for all subsequent stages, and sequence latents for generative training are precomputed once and stored in fp16. D.4.3 STAGE 2: SCORE MODEL AND INTERPOLATION PATH 

Flow-matching score model. A UNet with base widths 192 /256 /384 over resolutions 32 /16 /8,embedding dimension 256, self-attention at 16 2 and 82, and 24.9M parameters is trained with conditional flow matching between a standard normal at t=0 and the latent-frame distribution at t=1 .The regression target is x1 − x0 along the linear path, under an unweighted mean-squared-error loss. Time is sampled per example from an equal mixture of U(0 , 1) and U(0 .8, 1) , which concentrates capacity in the near-data regime that the interpolation path queries. One epoch is one pass over all training-split latent frames, and the EMA weights are the ones used downstream. 

Interpolation path. Given two consecutive frame latents x0, x 1, both endpoints are lifted by integrating the score model’s probability-flow ODE for 10 Euler steps of size 0.02, from t=1 to 

tlift =0 .8, which is 20% of the way toward the noise distribution. The interpolator acts in the lifted space and is realized as a small UNet with four levels of width 64, no attention, and 1.78M parameters. Similar to the step size embedding of Stage 3, s enters the UNet through a Gaussian Fourier time embedding. The path state at s is then denoised by integrating the same ODE back from tlift to t=1 

with 10 Euler steps of 0.02. The interpolator network is trained with the metric-energy objective of the main text, with the correction weight α warmed linearly from 0 to 1 over the first 10% of steps. Training pairs are all consecutive latent transitions of the training split, with one path time s ∼ U (0 , 1) per pair, and the score-induced metric is evaluated at the lifted time rm = tlift = 0 .8. The linear ablation, reported as “Ours (linear)” in Tables 5 and 6, replaces this construction by plain linear interpolation of the latents and is identical in everything else. D.4.4 STAGE 3: LATENT VIDEO -GENERATION MODEL 

Architecture. The generative model is a conditional velocity field vθ (x, ∆t, z ) over frame la-tents x ∈ R4×32 ×32 , implemented as a UNet with four resolutions 32 /16 /8/4, base widths 

128 /192 /256 /320 , two pre-activation AdaGN residual blocks per level, multi-head self-attention with 8 heads at 82, 42, and the bottleneck, and 23.35M parameters. The step size ∆t enters through Gaussian Fourier features, 64 random frequencies at σ=2 , followed by a two-layer MLP into the 256-d embedding that modulates every AdaGN. The conditioning variable z is a spatial latent grid of shape 8×32 ×32 , channel-concatenated with x at the network input. The model has no absolute-time input. Two convolutional encoders map channel-stacked frame latents to per-position diagonal Gaussians over z. Their trunk is a 3×3 convolution to width 128, two residual blocks, a strided convolution to width 192, two residual blocks, nearest-neighbor upsampling back to 128, one residual block, and a 

1×1 head to (μ, log σ2), where log σ2 is clamped to [−8, 4] and initialized at −2. Input frames are channel-concatenated in ascending temporal order, which gives 5 · 4 = 20 input channels for the prior and 40 for the posterior. The interpolation context is stacked the same way, so the temporal spacing of the gaps is implicit in the protocol-specific weights rather than encoded explicitly. The posterior sees the full training window x1:10 and has 2.71M parameters, and the prior sees exactly the frames observed under the respective protocol and has 2.68M parameters, the five odd-indexed frames for interpolation and the first five frames for extrapolation. Interpolation and extrapolation 37 Table 9: Training details of the KTH generative model. Optimizer settings are in Table 8. Quantity Value 

Sampling of (t, ∆t)

Training windows all non-overlapping length-10 windows (stride 10) Queries per batch 16 windows × 2 queries Segment index k ∼ U{ 1, . . . , 9}

Intra-segment offset t ∼ U (0 , 1) , query time τ = k + t

Step size ∆t ∼ U (0 , 1] , clamped to τ + ∆ t ≤ 10 

Tangent probability ptan = 0 .2, then ∆t = 0 

Noise augmentation 

Scales 10 log-spaced values in [0 .01 , 0.5] 

Contraction rate λ = 10 

use separately trained models, identical in every hyperparameter except the fixed index set the prior encoder observes. 

Training signal. Table 9 reports the details of how (t, ∆t) is sampled during training and specifics of the transverse noise augmentation. Training windows are all non-overlapping length-10 windows of every training video’s latent trajectory, one epoch is one shuffled pass over all windows, and no data augmentation is used in Stages 2 and 3. The query time τ runs on the piecewise path through 

consecutive frames, and the step is drawn globally, so it may cross segment boundaries and is clamped at the window end. Tangent targets are computed by forward-mode differentiation through the path construction, and the latents have unit per-channel variance, which fixes the scale of the tabulated noise values. 

Optimization. Optimizer settings are those of Table 8, where weight decay applies only to weight tensors of rank ≥ 2 of the field and leaves biases, normalization gains, and the encoders undecayed. D.4.5 INFERENCE 

Given the observed frames, we draw a single latent sample z from the prior with a fixed random seed and generate the full trajectory with one explicit Euler rollout of the secant field, 

xs+1 = xs + h v θ (xs, h, z ), h = 0 .25 ,

which is 4× temporal supersampling relative to the native frame rate. The rollout starts from the protocol’s start frame, frame 1 for interpolation and frame 5 for extrapolation. Scored frames are read off at the corresponding integer times and decoded with the frozen autoencoder. For the qualitative figures (Figures 11 and 4) the identical procedure is run with h = 0 .5, the common display grid on which the Vid-ODE row is queried (see below). D.4.6 VID -ODE BASELINE 

We retrain Vid-ODE at 128 ×128 from the official implementation with its published defaults, sep-arately for the interpolation and extrapolation protocols, on exactly the same data as ours. Those defaults are batch size 8, Adamax at learning rate 10 −3 with 0.99 per-epoch decay, 500 epochs, adver-sarial weight 3×10 −3, dopri5 solvers, and backward-time encoding. The retrained interpolation model closely reproduces the KTH metrics reported by Park et al. (2021), at SSIM 0.912 against 0.911 published and LPIPS 0.049 against 0.048, and it exceeds the published PSNR by 1.3 dB, 33.08 against 31.77 (cf. Table 5), which confirms a faithful reproduction. Evaluation uses its own tester and metric code unmodified, on the final end-of-training checkpoint. For the qualitative figures, its continuous decoder is queried in a single recursive pass over its trained time span on the shared 0.5-frame display grid, with all its other settings untouched. This is 4× its input frame rate for interpolation and 2× for extrapolation, the densest continuous-sampling setting demonstrated in the Vid-ODE paper itself, whose appendix Fig. 18 generates 20 FPS videos from 5 FPS inputs. 38 Table 10: Simulation settings of the two PDE datasets. Both simulators are periodic and store 64 frames per trajectory. Setting Value 

Gray–Scott reaction–diffusion 

Domain and grid periodic Ω = [0 , 1] 2, 64 × 64 

Diffusion coefficients Da = 2 · 10 −5, Db = 10 −5

Feed and kill rate F = 0 .018 , K = 0 .051 

Integration spectral half-steps for diffusion, fourth-order Runge–Kutta for the reaction Internal time step ∆t = 1 .0

Internal steps per stored frame 50 Burn-in 300 steps Stored field species a only Training windows length 16 

Navier–Stokes 

Domain and simulation grid periodic Ω = [0 , 2π]2, 96 × 96 

Observed field centered 64 × 64 crop of the vorticity Viscosity ν = 10 −3, no linear drag Forcing sampled per trajectory, fixed in time Internal time step 0.01 Final time 32.0 Burn-in 1000 solver steps Training windows length 16 D.5 PDE D ATA 

We use two synthetic PDE datasets to evaluate continuous-time generation on scientific spatiotemporal fields. Both datasets consist of 64 × 64 scalar fields with 64 stored time frames per trajectory, and all PDE experiments in the main paper use a set of 128 trajectories. Training subsequences have length 

16 . The simulation settings of both datasets are collected in Table 10. 

Gray–Scott Reaction–Diffusion. We simulate the two-species Gray–Scott reaction–diffusion system on the periodic unit square Ω = [0 , 1] 2,

∂ta = Da∆a − ab 2 + F (1 − a),∂tb = Db∆b + ab 2 − (F + K)b, 

where a(t, x ) and b(t, x ) are concentration fields and the coefficients are those of Table 10. Initial conditions are sampled from randomized localized perturbations. Let cj ∈ [0 , 1] 2 denote randomly sampled cluster centers, with periodic distance 

dper (x, c j ) = min  

> m∈Z2

∥x − cj + m∥2.

For each cluster, we sample an amplitude Aj , anisotropic widths σj, 1, σ j, 2, and a random orientation. Writing Rj for the corresponding rotation matrix and 

Σj = Rj

σ2 

> j, 1

00 σ2

> j, 2



R⊤ 

> j

,

the initial b-field is formed from a mixture of periodic Gaussian blobs, 

b0(x) = 

> M

X

> j=1

Aj exp 



− 12 δj (x)⊤Σ−1 

> j

δj (x)



+ ξb(x),

where δj (x) is the shortest periodic displacement from cj to x, and ξb is small Gaussian pixel noise. The a-field is initialized near one and anticorrelated with b0,

a0(x) = 1 − ρ b 0(x) + ξa(x),

with small Gaussian noise ξa. Both fields are clipped to a bounded concentration range during simulation. We store only the a-field, so each observed trajectory is 

X = ( a(t0), a (t1), . . . , a (t63 )) .

39 For the distributional rollout experiment in Table 4, we use the partial-observation structure of this dataset explicitly. The learned models observe only the initial A-field. To construct a simulator reference distribution conditioned on the same observation, we keep this initial A-field fixed, resample the hidden initial B-field from the same clustered Gaussian initial-condition generator, and integrate the full Gray–Scott system forward. This produces multiple plausible A-field futures for the same observed initial condition. We use 32 observed starts. For each start, the hidden field is resampled 

4 times, which yields 128 reference futures, and our model draws 4 latent-conditioned rollouts per start, likewise yielding 128 samples, while the FNO baseline produces a single rollout per start. The FNO baseline is trained directly on the normalized A-field sequences as a deterministic one-step predictor, with the following configuration. • Fourier Neural Operator with (16 , 16) Fourier modes, hidden width 64 , four spectral layers, and a grid positional encoding, giving 2.41M parameters when complex spectral weights are counted once. • AdamW at learning rate 10 −3 and weight decay 10 −6, batch size 32 , and a mean-squared-error loss. • Input of four consecutive A-frames stacked along the channel dimension, with the next 

A-frame as target. • At evaluation time, initialization with the first four ground-truth frames and autoregressive rollout with a sliding four-frame input window. 

Navier–Stokes. We generate two-dimensional incompressible Navier–Stokes trajectories using 

exponax (Koehler et al., 2024) in vorticity form on the periodic domain Ω = [0 , 2π]2,

∂tω + u · ∇ ω = ν∆ω + f, 

where ω(t, x ) is scalar vorticity, u(t, x ) ∈ R2 is the incompressible velocity field, and 

∇ · u = 0 .

The velocity is recovered from vorticity through the stream function ψ,

u = ∇⊥ψ = ( ∂y ψ, −∂xψ), ∆ψ = ω. 

The viscosity and the remaining simulator settings are those of Table 10. The observed data are obtained by cropping the centered 64 × 64 region from the full vorticity solution, which makes the visible crop an open subsystem influenced by surrounding, unobserved flow. For numerical stability, simulations are run on a refined grid and then mapped back to the base resolution before cropping. Initial vorticity fields and forcing fields are sampled as Gaussian random fields in Fourier space. For a scalar field g, we sample complex Fourier coefficients 

bg(k) = A ζk

(∥k∥2 + τ 2)α/ 2 , k ∈ Z2,

with Hermitian symmetry imposed so that g is real-valued. Here ζk are independent complex standard Gaussian coefficients up to the reality constraint, A controls the amplitude, α controls spectral decay, and τ sets a correlation scale. The two fields use the parameters of Table 11, and the forcing is fixed over time within each trajectory. Table 11: Gaussian random field parameters of the Navier–Stokes initial vorticity and forcing. Field α τ A Fourier modes Initial vorticity 2.2 4.0 0.1 unrestricted Forcing 1.8 2.5 2.0 wavenumbers 3 to 14 For the robustness experiment in the main text, adaptive integration uses a Dormand–Prince solver over a sweep of relative tolerances rtol ∈ { 10 −1, 10 −2, 10 −3, 10 −4, 10 −5} with atol = 0 .1 ·

rtol , evaluated on a uniform 64-point output grid. The number of function evaluations is not fixed manually but chosen automatically by the adaptive solver for each tolerance, so the reported NFE values reflect the solver’s adaptive effort required to satisfy the specified error tolerances. 40 D.6 FINE -T IME GROUND -T RUTH REFERENCE 

The plausibility experiments of Section 4.3 score interpolation paths and trained fields against the true states of the system between the observed frames. We regenerate 8 fresh Gray–Scott trajectories with the paper’s simulator and parameters (Appendix D.5) on seeds unseen by any trained model, storing every 5th internal solver step instead of every 50th. The training grid is thereby an exact subset of the fine grid, at a fine spacing of 5 time units against ∆phys = 50 per training segment, with every coarse frame coinciding with one fine frame. The frozen prior and interpolator are evaluated with endpoints lifted at metric time rm = 0 .9, and all states are normalized with the interpolator’s training statistics. For each of the 63 segments per trajectory and the interior offsets s = j/ 10 , j = 1 , . . . , 9, we score every path against the true fine state at the matched time by the relative L2 error, the cosine between the path velocity and the true velocity, and the spectral diagnostic of the main text. The last one is evaluated on denormalized fields. Writing ˆx(k) for the two-dimensional Fourier transform of a field x and ¯x for its spatial mean, we average the power spectrum over B = 32 rings Kb of equal width in the radial wavenumber ∥k∥,

Sb(x) = 1

|Kb|

X

> k∈Kb

ˆx(k) 2,

and compare the path state x with the true state y by 

spec( x, y ) = ¯x − ¯y + 1

B

> B

X

> b=1

log Sb(x) − log Sb(y) .

The first term tracks the total concentration, and the second compares how much structure sits at each length scale. Values are averaged over segments and offsets and reported as mean ± std over the 8 trajectories, with full results in Appendix E.3. D.7 WIDER FRAME SPACING : S UPERVISION COMPARISON 

Models. The generative fields are trained at the two wider segment strides w ∈ { 15 , 20 } fine steps, where w = 10 is the training grid and the main text reports w = 20 . All three share one 3.99M-parameter UNet secant backbone without latent conditioning, the same normalization, computed from the sixteen observed frames, and the same inference procedure. Only the supervision differs. The score-target model regresses the tangent and secant targets of the frozen interpolator with the transverse correction of Appendix D.1 at λ = 20 , and the linear-target model is identical except that its targets come from linear interpolation. The Neural ODE reads the same backbone as an autonomous field at ∆t = 0 and is trained by integrating each segment with a differentiable ten-step RK4 and regressing the endpoint. All three use AdamW at learning rate 10 −4 and the same seed. 

Baseline validity and evaluation. To rule out an underfitted baseline, we require that the Neural ODE fits its training endpoints at least as accurately as the best simulation-free model fits the evaluation endpoints. This holds with a margin of 13 to 21 times, so differences in intermediate quality cannot be attributed to a poorly trained baseline. The data are the 16-frame window of a held-out fine trajectory never seen by the frozen prior or interpolator, and the w − 1 fine states inside each of the 15 segments are evaluation-only. Evaluation is teacher-forced per segment, so each segment starts at the ground-truth left frame, integrates the ∆t = 0 field with fixed-step RK4, and is scored with the metrics of Appendix D.6 plus the endpoint error, averaged over the 15 segments. D.8 FULLY OBSERVED GRAY –S COTT AND PHYSICS SUPERVISION 

Setup. The physics experiments use a two-channel Gray–Scott variant that stores both species, which makes the governing PDE residual computable. The setup comprises the following components. • 128 fresh training trajectories at the training stride. • The fine-reference trajectories of Appendix D.6 with both channels. • Per-channel normalization from the training split. • A two-channel flow-matching prior. 41 • A spectral implementation of the Gray–Scott right-hand side FGS , with Laplacian and reaction terms matching the data simulator exactly. 

Supervision variants. The interpolator parameterization and architecture are as in the other experi-ments, a 1.78M-parameter correction network on a lifted linear base with t(1 − t) correction for the score variant. The three variants differ only in the supervision. • V-score trains on the metric energy only. • V-phys applies the same correction parameterization directly in data space, without lifting, and trains the path to satisfy the governing equation instead of the metric energy. A segment time s ∈ [0 , 1] covers ∆phys = 50 physical time units, so the physical velocity along the path is ∆−1phys ∂sγ(s), obtained by a Jacobian-vector product through the correction network, and the loss is the mean squared PDE residual on denormalized states, 

Lphys = Es ∆−1phys ∂sγ(s) − FGS (γ(s)) 2,

where FGS collects the diffusion and reaction terms on the right-hand side of the two Gray– Scott equations of Appendix D.5. The residual vanishes exactly when the path solves the PDE, so this variant asks for a dynamically consistent path rather than a geometrically short one. • V-lin is the linear path and requires no training. We evaluate as in Appendix D.6 on all 8 trajectories and additionally report the residual RMS in physical units. The residual of the true fine trajectory itself, taken as central differences at the fine spacing, is 1.79 · 10 −5 and is quoted as the attainable floor. The comparison of the three variants is reported in Appendix E.3. 

Physics refinement at inference. Per segment, the path is represented by 11 samples at s = j/ 10 

including the endpoints, and the 9 interior states are optimized in denormalized space with Adam at learning rate 5 · 10 −3 on the mean squared PDE residual, with the path velocity taken as the central difference in s and the endpoints held fixed. The operation involves only FFTs and pointwise arithmetic, and no network is in the loop. Refinement costs 2 and 9 seconds per 63-segment trajectory on one GPU for K = 500 and K = 2000 descent steps. Full results for intermediate budgets are reported in Appendix E.3. D.9 MOLECULAR DYNAMICS 

Data. We use the MD17 (Chmiela et al., 2017) ethanol trajectory, loaded through the 

torch geometric interface in its original frame order. Observed frames are taken every 100 

native MD steps. The 99 raw frames inside each segment are seen by no model and serve as the ground truth between the frames, as in the fine-time reference of Appendix D.6. The flow-matching prior and the interpolator are fit to the first 90% of the trajectory. The three generative fields are fit to a single four-frame window of it, while the predictability numbers at the end of this subsection are measured on the held-out 10% . Each molecular state is represented by centered atomic coordinates 

xk = ( rk, 1, . . . , r k,N ) ∈ RN ×3,

> N

X

> i=1

rk,i = 0 , N = 9 ,

together with atom identities and connectivity that are fixed across the trajectory, so centering removes global translation from every frame. 

Prior knowledge in the interpolator. The physics experiment of Appendix D.8 adds the governing equation to the interpolator. Molecular trajectories carry a different kind of prior knowledge, and we add it here in the same way. First, we observe that the per-segment interpolation objective of Appendix B.5 leads to abrupt changes in the velocity at segment borders, i.e. at observed frames. We hypothesize that the MD setting amplifies this because of the severely underconstrained motion between endpoints. A physical trajectory evolves smoothly, and on the raw trajectory the angle between the incoming and the 42 outgoing velocity is 8.9◦, against 107 .2◦ for the two linear segments that an endpoint-only path follows. The second piece concerns the speed. In the image experiments only the metric speed carries meaning, because distances in pixel space do not, whereas atomic coordinates measure physical distance. Therefore, we can also ask the path to move at a roughly uniform Euclidean speed. For both, we will augment the interpolation objective similar to the experiment in Appendix D.8. 

The augmented interpolation objective. We keep the parameterization of Appendix B.5. For the segment between two observed frames xk and xk+1 , we write ¯γω,k t := ¯ γωt (xk, x k+1 ; α) for the lifted path, where the correction network φω is shared by all segments. Its velocity is 

˙¯γω,k t = ¯ xk+1 − ¯xk + α(1 − 2t) φω (¯ xk, ¯xk+1 , t ) + α t (1 − t) ∂tφω (¯ xk, ¯xk+1 , t )

| {z }  

> = 0 at t∈{ 0,1}

.

Because the last term vanishes at both ends of a segment, the two one-sided velocities at the frame shared by segments k and k + 1 reduce to 

˙¯γω,k  

> 1

= ¯ xk+1 − ¯xk − α φ ω (¯ xk, ¯xk+1 , 1) , ˙¯γω,k +1 0 = ¯ xk+2 − ¯xk+1 + α φ ω (¯ xk+1 , ¯xk+2 , 0) ,

which in general differ. To remove that kink, we introduce a junction penalty that drives the two one-sided velocities together at every shared frame, 

Ljunc (ω) = Ek ˙¯γω,k  

> 1

− ˙¯γω,k +1 0

> 22

.

On its own, this penalty has a trivial minimizer. The cheapest way to make two velocities agree is to send both to zero, which yields a path that stalls at every observed frame and sprints in between. We therefore introduce a second penalty that keeps the path moving. Let 

ρk(t) = ˙¯γω,k t

∥¯xk+1 − ¯xk∥

denote the instantaneous speed in units of the mean speed of the same segment. The speed penalty acts only below a floor ρ⋆,

Lspeed (ω) = Ek, t ∼U [0 ,1] 

max  0, ρ ⋆ − ρk(t)2,

so it never slows the path down and only lifts its stalled parts. Two choices in this penalty matter. First, the reference ∥¯xk+1 − ¯xk∥ is fixed by the observed endpoints. The optimizer therefore cannot meet the floor by inflating φω until the lifted path leaves the region where the frozen score model is valid. Second, both norms are Euclidean coordinate norms rather than metric norms, which is the speed prior stated above. We evaluate them in lifted space, where the short denoising flow is close to an isometry, at roughly a tenth of the cost of the clean-space speed. The full objective is 

L(ω) = Lgeo (ω) + λj Ljunc (ω) + λs Lspeed (ω),

where Lgeo is the metric energy of Appendix B.5. Setting λj = λs = 0 recovers that objective exactly. We use λj = 1 , λs = 12 and ρ⋆ = 0 .9.

Exactness at the observed frames. The factor t(1 − t) vanishes at both ends for every ω, so the path passes through all observed frames exactly, whatever the correction network does. The endpoint values φω (·, 0) and φω (·, 1) that appear in the two one-sided velocities are the degrees of freedom that this factor leaves unconstrained on path positions. Velocity continuity is therefore obtained without moving the path away from the observed frames. Continuity also carries over from lifted to clean space. The two segments meeting at a shared frame denoise the identical lifted point, so their clean velocities are the same denoising Jacobian applied to the two lifted velocities above. Every internal coordinate q inherits the property through ˙q = ∇q · ˙γ.

Training the interpolator. Training items are consecutive frame triplets of the training split. Every item is therefore a pair of adjacent segments sharing one frame, so the junction penalty has a shared frame to act on at every step. The remaining settings are listed in Table 12. The correction strength α

is ramped as in Appendix B.5. We switch the speed penalty on only once that ramp has finished, so that junctions exist before they are smoothed. The tangent, the metric-vector product and the path speed are all obtained by Jacobian-vector products. 43 Table 12: Training configuration of the augmented molecular interpolator. The correction network is the EGNN of Table 7, evaluated on the paired graph of the two lifted endpoints. Setting Value Training item consecutive frame triplet, two adjacent segments sharing one frame Correction network 735 .5k-parameter EGNN Lifting 10 Euler probability-flow steps at step size 0.01 , metric time rm = 0 .9

Batch size 64 triplets Optimizer AdamW at learning rate 10 −3

Schedule 1% linear warmup, cosine decay to 2% of the peak rate Budget 60 000 steps Gradient clip 1.0

Seed 0

Correction ramp α from 0 to 1 over the first 20% of steps Speed penalty switched on once the ramp has finished Speed evaluation four stratified interpolation times per segment 

Effect of the added terms. We measure continuity on the velocity vector. At a shared frame we take the clean-space velocity at t = 1 of one segment and at t = 0 of the next, both by Jacobian-vector products through the denoising flow, and report the angle between them. Averaged over 32 shared frames from eight six-frame stretches at the deployed stride of 100 , the interpolator trained without the added penalties leaves a kink of 92 .5◦. This is close to the 107 .2◦ of the linear segments it corrects. The augmented interpolator leaves 28 .0◦, against 8.9◦ for the true trajectory. Over the same stretches the metric energy drops from 2247 to 930 , so the continuity is not bought by leaving the score manifold. 

The three generative fields. The molecular demonstration from the main text trains three uncondi-tional velocity fields on one fixed trajectory of four consecutive observed frames. This is the first length-four window of the training split and covers raw frames 0 to 300 in three segments. All three fields share one 1.46 M-parameter EGNN with hidden width 128 and twelve message-passing layers, without latent conditioning, so the field is autonomous. They also share one optimizer, AdamW at learning rate 2 · 10 −4 with batch 256 for 8000 steps at seed 0, and one inference procedure. Only the training signal differs. Since the coordinate updates are built from relative displacements, all three fields are translation- and rotation-equivariant. The score-target field regresses the tangent and secant targets of the frozen augmented interpolator, drawing the tangent target with probability 0.2 and otherwise a secant step of up to two frame intervals. Its targets carry the transverse correction of Appendix D.1 at λ = 1 , with ten log-spaced noise scales in [0 .01 , 0.1] ˚A. The linear-target field uses the identical pipeline with the linear path between observed frames as its target source. The Neural ODE integrates each segment from its ground-truth left frame over one frame interval with a differentiable ten-step RK4 and regresses the endpoint only. We add the Jacobian-Frobenius regularization that is standard for this kind of training (Finlay et al., 2020) at weight 10 −4, estimated with one Hutchinson probe per solver stage. Even with this stabilization technique, we faced instability during training, reaching the optimum early and degrading afterwards. Therefore, we report only the best-loss results for the Neural ODE. The true trajectory carries small-scale thermal jitter that likely no unconditional path can reproduce without knowing the external forcing that produced that trajectory. Closing this gap probably needs conditioning on the forces that produced the particular trajectory, which we leave to future work. D.10 INFERENCE AND FIGURE DETAILS 

Unless stated otherwise, all reported results use the raw weights of the trained generative vector fields and the corresponding frozen interpolation prior, and rollouts integrate the learned dynamics without any re-anchoring at observed states. KTH inference is described separately in Appendix D.4. 44 2D example (Figures 5 and 6). Panel (a) of Figure 5 overlays samples of the pretrained score model, obtained by integrating its generative flow with 100 uniform steps from 2048 Gaussian noise samples, with dataset sequences and one ground-truth loop. The conditional rollouts in panels (b)–(d) integrate the learned vector field with a fixed-step solver using 800 uniform steps over the full loop duration 

T = 8 , or 400 steps for Figure 6, and draw 32 latent samples from the observation-conditioned prior per prefix. Panel (e) shows the latent Gaussians after projection onto the two leading principal components of the latent covariance. 

2D global fields (Figure 2). The conditioned panels evaluate the ∆t = 0 field on a 61 × 61 grid over [−1.05 , 1.05] 2 for the gray streamlines at density 1.4, and on a 26 × 26 grid for the unit-arrow quiver. Each arrow is colored by the transverse inflow c(x) = ⟨ˆv(x), −ˆe(x)⟩ toward the conditioned reference path Γz of the frozen interpolator, which is drawn from 1600 path samples, under a diverging colormap with symmetric limits at the 95th percentile of |c| and with arrows within 0.01 of the path masked. The path Γz is overlaid in black with the loop nodes in green. The conditioning latent is the posterior mean of q(z | x) under each model’s own posterior encoder, and the latent-free panel uses the (score, corrected, no-latent) ablation model with the same loop as reference. The setting panel shows 2048 samples of the pretrained score model obtained by integrating its generative flow with 100 uniform steps, its score field at the interpolator’s lift time as gray unit arrows on the same 26 × 26 grid, all candidate conditioning nodes in black, the active loop in green, and the linear path between its nodes dashed. 

Transverse contraction measurements (Table 1). For the 2D example, the pointwise eigenvalue map evaluates λ⊥(x) = ˆ n⊤ 12 (Dv + Dv ⊤)ˆ n with exact autograd Jacobians of the ∆t = 0 field on a 

141 × 141 grid, masked to the tube ∥x − Γz ∥ ≤ 0.15 , which is about three times the largest training noise scale. Here ˆn is the 90 ◦-rotated tangent of Γz at the nearest of its 1600 samples, and z is the posterior mean of the all-inner loop. Finite rates use 64 anchors placed uniformly along Γz and perturbed along the local path normal with amplitudes {0.01 , 0.03 , 0.05 }. Both the perturbed and the unperturbed anchor are integrated under RK4 with step 0.005 for t ∈ [0 , 0.5] , and the rate is the least-squares slope of log e(t) on t ∈ [0 , 0.2] , where e(t) is the separation between the two rollouts, reported as the median over anchors and amplitudes. The Navier–Stokes measurement applies the identical methodology to the frozen single-sequence checkpoints of Section 4.2, using 32 anchor states along the frozen score-interpolation path, 8 Gaussian directions per anchor projected orthogonally to the local field direction, and amplitudes 

{0.01 , 0.05 , 0.1} in normalized units. This gives 768 perturbed rollouts per model, integrated with RK4 at step 0.01 over t ∈ [0 , 0.5] . Comparing the two rollouts of the same field isolates the transverse response from its shared advection error, and we report the median of the fitted rates and the fraction of contracting perturbations. For the corrected model the median is the same to two decimals at each of the three amplitudes, at −0.90, so one number summarizes the measurement. 

Rollout stability (Figures 8 and 9). Figure 8 uses three inference regimes. (a) Direct secant steps with h ∈ { 0.01 , 0.1, 0.25 , 0.5}.(b) Fixed-step RK4 integration with h ∈ { 0.01 , 0.1, 0.25 , 0.5, 1}.(c) Adaptive Dormand–Prince integration over a sweep of tolerances, where the number of function evaluations is chosen by the solver as described in Appendix D.5. Reported values are LPIPS against the reference trajectory, averaged over the 64-frame rollout excluding the initial frame. The qualitative comparison in Figure 9 uses the secant rollout with 

h = 0 .5, and for display, frames are normalized per time step to the 1%/99% quantile range of the ground-truth frame. 

Gray–Scott (Table 4 and Figure 12). Rollouts integrate the h = 0 slice of the learned field with fixed-step RK4 using 10 substeps per unit time up to T = 256 , with latent variables drawn from the prior conditioned on the first observed frame. The sliced Wasserstein distances in Table 4 use 256 random unit-norm projections of the flattened, denormalized 64 × 64 fields, computed independently at each horizon with a fixed seed. The true-against-true reference is a single fixed even/odd split of the 128 simulator futures into two sets of 64, and the reported value is the ratio of the model-against-simulator distance to this reference. For the deterministic FNO baseline, which contributes 32 rollouts, 45 sorted projections are truncated to the smaller sample count before averaging. The qualitative figure shows two prior samples for one test start, with frames read off at t ∈ { 0, 8, 16 , 32 , 64 , 128 , 256 }.

Navier–Stokes sub-frame dynamics (Figure 10). For a randomly drawn test sequence, both models are conditioned on the posterior latent of that sequence and integrated with fixed-step RK4 using 50 substeps per frame interval over t ∈ [0 , 2] , which is two frame intervals. The enstrophy diagnostic is computed as E(t) = 12 ω2, where ω = ∂xv − ∂y u is evaluated by central differences under periodic shifts. Since the stored field is single-channel, the same stencil is applied to the stored field itself as a curl proxy. The right panel reports the absolute change |E(ti+1 ) − E(ti)| between consecutive solver outputs, normalized by the mean absolute change of the linear-target model. 

Molecular dynamics (Figure 3). All three fields are rolled out freely from the first observed frame of the fitted four-frame window of Appendix D.9, with fixed-step RK4 at 100 substeps per segment. The substep count equals the frame stride, so every rollout step lands on a raw MD frame and every deviation is aligned to the native grid. The fields are queried at their zero-step slice, which is the continuous-time velocity, and no re-anchoring at observed frames takes place. Panels (a) and (b) draw the rolled-out molecule in three dimensions over the first segment for the score-target model and for the linear-target model, with the intermediate configurations faint and the first and the last configuration solid, and with the drawn bonds taken from the static molecular graph of Appendix D.9. Panels (c) and (d) plot the O–H bond length and the C–O–H bond angle of all three rollouts against rollout time, which is counted in observed frame intervals so that the integer ticks and the light vertical lines mark the observed frames, together with the true trajectory at native resolution as a dashed black curve. The atom roles that define these two coordinates are identified once on the first frame and reused for every curve, so the same three atoms are tracked throughout. 

# E ADDITIONAL RESULTS 

E.1 DEMONSTRATIVE EXAMPLE 

Figure 5 shows the setting of the 2D dataset together with conditional rollouts for increasing observed context and the latent distributions. k=1 k=3 k=5 k=7 k=9     

> (a) k=1 k=3 k=5 k=7 k=9 (b) k=1 k=3 k=5 k=7 k=9 (c) k=1 k=3 k=5 k=7 k=9 (d) k=1 k=3 k=5 k=7 k=9 (e)

Figure 5: 2D example. (a) Learned manifold and one example trajectory. (b)–(d) Conditional trajec-tory samples for increasing observed context (green). (e) PCA projection of the latent distributions. Figure 6 shows additional conditional samples. The observed prefix is shown in green, while the sampled continuations illustrate how the model uses the latent variable to represent unresolved branch choices. As the amount of conditioning increases, the samples preserve the observed arch decisions while maintaining diversity over the unobserved parts of the loop. 46 Figure 6: Additional conditional samples on the 2D dataset. The model follows the curved score-induced manifold and preserves stochasticity over future branch choices that are not fixed by the observed context. Supplementing Figure 2(b), Figure 7 shows another field for a different latent variable, resulting in another branch configuration. Switching z thus switches the entire field, so each latent corresponds to a single trajectory and there is no competing path toward which the transverse correction could pull off-path states. 

Figure 7: The learned field vθ (x | z) conditioned on a second branch configuration (rendering as in Figure 2). Table 13: Ablations on the 2D example. Each row removes one component (“ − correction” keeps the input noise but drops the target correction). Branch acc. has chance level ≈ 1/16 , the training rate is 

−λ = −10 , and the metrics are defined in Appendix D.3.                        

> Model off-manifold ↓branch acc. ↑rate ↓
> ours (score, corrected, latent) 0.007 1.000 −5.4
> −latent 0.009 0.047 −4.0
> −correction 0.024 1.000 +0.0
> −score →linear 0.036 1.000 −3.6

E.2 ROBUSTNESS 

Figure 8 reports the rollout accuracy of the reconstruction experiment of Section 4.2 under the three inference regimes. The corrected objective attains consistently lower error across solver settings and remains stable at coarse step sizes. 47 0.01 0.1 0.25 0.5  

> step size h
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5

(a) Secant steps with h > 00.01 0.1 0.25 0.5 1  

> step size h
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5

(b) fixed-step ODE solve 0 1000 2000 3000  

> NFE
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> vanilla noised ours

(c) adaptive ODE solve 

Figure 8: Mean LPIPS over rollout for the reconstruction experiment under three inference regimes. Figure 9 provides a qualitative view. Without transverse correction, small deviations from the reference path can compound during rollout. The robustified objective instead trains the vector field to return perturbed states toward the interpolation path, which leads to more stable long-horizon reconstructions. This demonstrates that the objective which promotes path-relative transverse contraction does not only improve rollouts, but is necessary to prevent catastrophic error accumulation. GT       

> t=0 t=10 t=21 t=32 t=42 t=52 t=63
> Vanilla Noised Ours

Figure 9: Qualitative robustness comparison for Navier–Stokes reconstruction under coarse secant rollout with step size h = 0 .5. The transverse robustness objective reduces accumulated drift by training perturbed states to return toward the interpolation path. E.3 PLAUSIBILITY OF INTERMEDIATES 

Tables 14–17 report the full results for the experiments of Section 4.3, with data, training, and evaluation details given in Appendices D.6–D.8. Table 14 adds the velocity cosine to the two metrics of Table 2. The two paths separate cleanly at every interior offset, and the score path is not only closer to the true intermediates, it also follows the direction of the true motion more faithfully, at a cosine of 0.996 against 0.965 for the linear path. 48 Table 14: Frozen interpolation paths against the true fine-time intermediates (mean ± std over 8 trajectories).                         

> Path rel-L2↓cos-vel ↑spectral ↓
> linear 0.055 ±0.001 0.965 ±0.000 0.471 ±0.004 score 0.019 ±0.001 0.996 ±0.000 0.134 ±0.017

The training grid corresponds to a segment stride of w = 10 fine steps, and the generative fields are retrained at the two wider spacings w = 15 and w = 20 , where the endpoints leave the interior increasingly underdetermined. The main text reports w = 20 , twice the training spacing, and Table 15 reports both spacings with all metrics and the endpoint error, together with the frozen interpolator that supplies the score targets. The ordering is stable across the two spacings. The Neural ODE has the lowest tracking error and the highest velocity cosine everywhere. Its intermediates are nevertheless the least plausible under the spectral diagnostic at w = 20 , and its spectral value degrades faster with spacing than that of either simulation-free model, from 0.303 to 0.482, which is how it moves from the middle of the field at 

w = 15 to last place at w = 20 . The score-supervised field instead stays with its frozen teacher on every metric, at w = 20 reaching rel-L2 0.115 against the teacher’s 0.116 and a spectral value of 0.335 against 0.331. What the field inherits is therefore the plausibility of the paths it was trained on, and training the same backbone on linear targets inherits their implausibility in the same way. Table 15: Generative fields at the two wider frame spacings, with the frozen teacher for reference. The spectral diagnostic is defined in Appendix D.6.                                           

> Model rel-L2↓cos-vel ↑spectral ↓endpoint ↓
> w= 15
> score interpolator (teacher) 0.055 0.983 0.198 —score targets 0.053 0.984 0.230 0.037 linear targets 0.106 0.925 0.442 0.052 Neural ODE 0.030 0.996 0.303 0.003
> w= 20
> score interpolator (teacher) 0.116 0.954 0.331 —score targets 0.115 0.954 0.335 0.059 linear targets 0.177 0.886 0.439 0.064 Neural ODE 0.060 0.984 0.482 0.003

Exact recovery of the intermediate dynamics cannot be guaranteed from the score prior alone, so we ask what happens when the governing equations are available and can be supplied to the interpolator instead. This uses a fully observed variant of Gray–Scott that stores both species, which makes the PDE residual computable. Table 16 compares the three supervision variants. Score geometry alone improves 2.7 × over linear interpolation without any knowledge of the equations, and training the same interpolator to minimize the PDE residual instead brings the path to within 3 × of the ground-truth residual floor. The same training objective therefore admits the score prior when nothing else is known and the governing equations when they are available. Table 16: Interpolation with score geometry against known dynamics on the fully observed two-species variant (mean ± std over 8 trajectories, ground-truth residual floor 1.79 · 10 −5).                            

> Variant rel-L2↓cos-vel ↑residual ↓
> V-lin (no training) 0.0768 ±0.0016 0.943 7.9·10 −4
> V-score (geometry only) 0.0283 ±0.0007 0.992 3.5·10 −4
> V-phys (residual supervision) 0.0035 ±0.0001 0.9998 5.4·10 −5

The residual can also be reduced after training, by descending on it directly at inference time without any network in the loop. Table 17 reports this for an increasing number of optimization steps K.The score path starts at a lower residual and also refines further, reaching 5.6 · 10 −5 at K = 2000 ,49 which is within 3.1× of the true trajectory’s residual, while the linear path stops at 1.6 · 10 −4, or 

8.9×. Both paths improve in relative L2 as well, but the linear path stays between 2.6 and 2.8 times further from the true states than the score path at every budget, so refinement removes part of the residual that the linear path introduces without recovering the geometry it missed. The K = 0 rows coincide with the unrefined paths by construction, and the small residual differences to Table 16 stem from the discretized path representation of the refinement evaluation. Table 17: Physics refinement of interpolation paths on the fully observed two-species variant for increasing refinement budgets K (mean ± std over 8 trajectories where shown).                                                                                        

> Init. path Krel-L2↓cos-vel ↑residual ↓
> linear 00.0768 ±0.0016 0.943 7.9·10 −4
> linear 20 0.0771 ±0.0016 0.944 6.4·10 −4
> linear 100 0.0764 ±0.0016 0.950 4.6·10 −4
> linear 500 0.0708 ±0.0014 0.965 2.9·10 −4
> linear 2000 0.0588 ±0.0012 0.982 1.6·10 −4
> score 00.0283 ±0.0007 0.992 3.4·10 −4
> score 20 0.0278 ±0.0006 0.993 2.6·10 −4
> score 100 0.0269 ±0.0006 0.994 1.8·10 −4
> score 500 0.0252 ±0.0006 0.995 1.0·10 −4
> score 2000 0.0222 ±0.0006 0.997 5.6·10 −5

Figure 10 repeats the comparison qualitatively on a second system, Navier–Stokes, using two otherwise identical generative models trained with score-induced and with linear interpolation targets. Since the endpoints are nearby frames of a smooth trajectory, the enstrophy of plausible intermediate states should vary smoothly. Both models capture the coarse transition, but the linear model produces a visibly less regular sub-frame evolution with sharp changes in enstrophy, while the score-supervised model varies smoothly under this diagnostic (setup in Appendix D.10). Linear       

> t=0 t=0.5 t=1.0 t=1.5 t=2.0
> Score 012012
> linear score

Figure 10: Navier–Stokes sub-frame dynamics for score-induced and linear interpolation targets. Left: generated intermediate vorticity fields. Right: change in enstrophy along the interpolation. The molecular-dynamics comparison of Section 4.3, where the Neural ODE fails on both counts at once, is documented with its diagnostics in Appendix D.9. E.4 NATURAL VIDEOS : I NTERPOLATION 

Figure 11 complements the extrapolation comparison of Figure 4 with the interpolation setting of Section 4.5 (observe every second frame and predict the held-out ones, quantitative results in Table 5). All model outputs are shown on the shared half-frame display grid, generated in a single rollout as described in Appendix D.4. At the unsupervised half-times, Vid-ODE’s recursively warped outputs exhibit double-exposure ghosting on the moving limbs, the failure mode that its frame metrics at observed timestamps do not expose, while our rollout remains closer to the true trajectory. 50 Ground truth          

> t= 2 t= 3 t= 4 t= 5 t= 6
> Vid-ODE
> Ours

Figure 11: Interpolation on KTH. Rows: ground truth at integer times (observed frames framed in green; half-times have no ground truth), Vid-ODE, and ours, with all model outputs on the shared half-frame display grid. Vid-ODE drifts off the data manifold at intermediate times (ghosted arms). E.5 PDE-GOVERNED SPATIOTEMPORAL FIELDS 

Figure 12 shows qualitative long-horizon Gray–Scott rollouts from the latent-conditioned model. The model is conditioned only on the first observed concentration field and samples different latent variables from the learned prior. Although training uses subsequences of length 16 and the available training trajectories have length at most 64 , the generated rollouts are shown up to T = 256 . The samples remain visually plausible while exhibiting distinct futures, reflecting ambiguity induced by the unobserved chemical species. prior #1  t=0 t=8 t=16 t=32 t=64 t=128 t=256 

> prior #2

Figure 12: Gray–Scott long-horizon rollouts from the latent-conditioned model. The model is conditioned only on the first observed concentration field and samples different latent variables, producing distinct plausible futures up to T = 256 .51