Title: Reasoning Without Inference Cost: Latent Semantic Scaffolding for Robot VLA Policies

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.04893v1

Published Time: Mon, 07 Sep 2026 00:42:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# Reasoning Without Inference Cost: Latent Semantic Scaffolding for Robot VLA Policies 

Andrew Ting Yan Li, Zhuo Li, Zhelin Yang, Zhipeng Dong, Quentin Rouxel, and Fei Chen, Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract—Vision-language-action (VLA) models are trained by imitation and capture what action to take but not why ;adding causal reasoning improves manipulation, but current methods pay for it at inference time—generating reasoning tokens or rolling out predicted future states at every step, a cost that compounds over long horizons. We ask whether this benefit can instead be captured during training and discarded before deployment. We introduce Latent Semantic Scaffolding (LSS), an auxiliary loss applied during human-demonstration pretraining that aligns a VLA’s action-token representations to text embeddings of physical-reasoning rationales through a small projection head. The head is dropped at inference, leaving the unmodified base policy with zero added cost. Our central finding concerns alignment granularity : aligning each action token to the rationale of its own manipulation phase (Dense LSS) rather than to a single pooled episode-level embedding (Pooled LSS) yields representations that transfer markedly better to held-out tasks. Dense LSS attains both the best in-distribution success and the best transfer to tasks unseen during alignment, whereas pooled alignment over-specializes to the training task. A representational probe shows Dense LSS induces roughly twice the per-phase separability in the backbone, supporting that phase-local alignment is the operative mechanism. 

Fig. 1: LSS injects reasoning at training time and discards it at inference. 

Left (training): the backbone is trained on the flow-matching objective while an auxiliary projection head gϕ aligns each action token to the T5 embedding of its manipulation-phase reasoning—an auxiliary branch that shapes the backbone but does not lie on the action-production path. Right (inference): 

the head and reasoning encoder are removed; the deployed policy is the unmodified base VLA with reasoning “baked in,” at zero added cost. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Vision-language-action models (VLAs) map perception to action by imitation, learning generalizable sensorimotor con-trol from large-scale robot and non-robot demonstrations [1]– [4]. To scale beyond the cost of teleoperated robot data, a growing line of work pretrains VLAs on egocentric human 

demonstrations before finetuning on a small amount of robot data [5]–[7]. Yet a policy trained purely to reproduce demon-strated actions captures the what of a motion without its causal 

why . Recent work shows that injecting reasoning—an explicit account of the task’s causal and physical structure—improves manipulation, particularly on tasks that require multiple steps or generalization beyond the training distribution [8], [9]. This benefit, however, is typically realized at inference 

time. Embodied chain-of-thought policies generate textual reasoning traces autoregressively before each action [9], while visual chain-of-thought policies predict future image frames as subgoals and then act toward them [8]. World action models 

> ∗

This work is supported in part by the Research Grants Council of the Government of the Hong Kong SAR via the Grants 24209021, 14213324, C7100-22GF, and in part by the InnoHK of the Government of the Hong Kong SAR via the Hong Kong Centre for Logistics Robotics. (Corresponding author: Fei Chen.) 

All authors are with the Collaborative and Versatile Robots (CLOVER) Laboratory, T-Stone Robotics Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong (e-mail: ali@mae.cuhk.edu.hk; zli@mae.cuhk.edu.hk; zlyang@mae.cuhk.edu.hk; zhipengdong@cuhk.edu.hk; quentinrouxel@cuhk.edu.hk; f.chen@ieee.org). 

go further still, jointly predicting future states and actions in a unified model so that action generation is coupled to an explicit forecast of the next state [10]. Both families re-incur their reasoning or prediction computation at every control step, and the cost is large: a recent robustness study reports that world action models run 4.8× to 83 × slower per action chunk than a comparable flow-based VLA [11], and dedicated efficiency work exists purely to reduce the overhead of autoregressive reasoning traces [12]. The cost also compounds with task length—a long-horizon task re-pays the reasoning tax at every sub-step, precisely where multi-step planning matters most. Standard VLA supervision is also coarse: a whole trajectory is paired with a single instruction phrase, with no link between language sub-parts and action sub-segments [13]. Fine-grained datasets exist, but typically treat sub-tasks as prediction or segmentation labels rather than causal rationale [14]. This raises the question we study: must reasoning’s benefit be paid at inference at all, or can it be captured at training time and discarded? We hypothesize the latter—if reasoning helps by shaping a policy’s internal representations rather than by being generated step by step, its benefit can be baked into the weights, and the runtime cost avoided. We realize this with LSS and, crucially, study how the alignment should be structured (Fig. 1). Our contributions are:  

> •

LSS , a training-time auxiliary loss that aligns a VLA’s action-token representations to embeddings of physical-reasoning text. The alignment head is discarded at infer-ence, adding zero cost over the base policy. arXiv:2609.04893v1 [cs.RO] 4 Sep 2026 • An alignment-granularity result : per-token, phase-local (dense ) alignment transfers to held-out tasks better than episode-pooled alignment. A controlled finetuning ladder isolates this from the human-data and task-matching confounds.  

> •

A representational probe showing dense alignment induces ∼2× stronger per-phase separation in the backbone—supporting evidence that phase-local shaping drives the transfer gain. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Test-time reasoning and prediction 

A growing line of work improves manipulation by having the policy reason before it acts, generating an intermediate artifact at inference time. Embodied chain-of-thought (ECoT) trains a VLA to emit step-by-step textual reasoning—plans, sub-tasks, and visually grounded features such as object bounding boxes and end-effector positions—before predicting each action [9]. Visual chain-of-thought instead predicts future image frames as visual subgoals and then produces a short action sequence toward them [8]. These differ in the modality 

of what they generate (text vs. predicted pixels) but share a defining trait: the reasoning computation recurs at every infer-ence step. Because the traces are produced autoregressively, this becomes the dominant runtime cost, motivating dedicated efficiency work that reuses or parallelizes the reasoning to recover speed [12]. The overhead compounds over long hori-zons. Our work moves this computation entirely to training time, so the deployed policy carries none of it. 

B. Representation alignment as a training signal 

A separate line uses representation alignment as an aux-iliary training objective rather than a generation target. In image generation, REPA regularizes a diffusion transformer by aligning its noisy hidden states to features from a pre-trained visual encoder, substantially accelerating convergence [15]. This is a close methodological relative of our loss— a cosine alignment through a lightweight projection head— but in a different domain (generation, not control) and with a different teacher (vision features, not reasoning). We differ on both the teacher and the granularity : we align action-token representations to embeddings of causal reasoning text, and we show that aligning each token to its own manipulation-phase rationale, rather than to a single pooled target, is what produces transferable representations. Fine-grained sub-task datasets exist but treat sub-tasks as prediction or segmentation labels [14]; we instead align to causal rationale and, unlike all of the above, discard the alignment apparatus entirely at inference. 

C. Human-demonstration pretraining for VLAs 

Egocentric human manipulation data offers a scalable source of behavioral priors for robot policies. H-RDT pretrains a 2B-parameter diffusion-transformer policy on large-scale human manipulation data with paired 3D hand-pose annotations, then cross-embodiment finetunes on robot data [5]; EgoVLA and Being-H0 likewise learn from human video before light robot finetuning [6], [7]. We adopt H-RDT as our backbone. Its original recipe has two stages—human pretrain followed by robot finetune—and we insert an LSS-supervised human-pretraining stage between them. That inserted stage, not the human-demonstration paradigm itself, is our contribution. LSS thus occupies an intersection the above do not fill: 

alignment rather than generation (unlike CoT/world-model methods), a reasoning-text teacher rather than a vision teacher (unlike REPA-style alignment), inside human-demonstration pretraining —with phase-local structure carrying causal ratio-nale, at zero added inference cost. III. M ETHOD 

A. Preliminaries 

We build on H-RDT [5]: DINO+SigLIP vision encoders, a frozen T5-XXL encoder for the task command, a 2B-parameter diffusion-transformer backbone fθ , and a flow-matching action head. Conditioned on an image observation and the task command, the backbone produces K=16 action tokens Zact = {z1, . . . , z K } ∈ RK×2176 , decoded by the action head into a trajectory; the primary objective is the flow-matching loss Lflow . H-RDT’s original recipe has two stages: human-data pretraining and robot finetuning. We insert asecond pretraining stage in which LSS is active, giving a three-stage pipeline: (i) human pretrain, (ii) LSS human pretrain, (iii) robot finetune. Stage 2 supervises H-RDT’s unified 48-D human action representation; Stage 3 finetunes to the 14-D robot. 

B. Reasoning as an alignment target, not an input 

Each human trajectory carries a physical-reasoning descrip-tion Treason generated offline by a VLM (Sec. III-F) and encoded by a frozen T5-XXL. The reasoning text is used only as the alignment target—it never conditions the policy. Language conditioning comes solely from the task command; reasoning influences the policy purely through the LSS loss, and the reasoning-T5 embeddings are precomputed and cached. Consequently the reasoning encoder is never instantiated at inference. 

C. Pooled LSS 

LSS adds a non-linear projection head, the LSAHead gϕ :

R2176 → R4096 , mapping action-token hidden states into the T5 embedding space. In the pooled variant, the action tokens are mean-pooled to ¯z = 1

> K

P 

> i

zi and aligned to a single mean-pooled reasoning embedding etext = MeanPool( ET 5(Treason )) 

by a cosine distance: 

LLSS = 1 − gϕ(¯ z) · etext 

∥gϕ(¯ z)∥ ∥ etext ∥ , Ltotal = Lflow + λ L LSS , (1) with λ=0 .1. The LSAHead is a two-layer MLP ( 2176 → 2176 ,GELU, 2176 → 4096 ). The alignment loss acts as a secondary pressure (small λ) that reshapes action representations toward the reasoning structure without overriding action prediction. Fig. 2: Dense LSS architecture (Stage 2, training only). A frozen DINO+SigLIP encoder and a frozen T5-XXL command encoder condition the 2B diffusion-transformer backbone, which produces K=16 action tokens Zt ∈ R2176 supervised by the flow-matching loss Lflow . In parallel, the LSAHead projection gϕ maps each action token into T5 space and a cosine-distance loss aligns it to the reasoning embedding of its own manipulation phase, ephase (t)      

> (straddling tokens masked by mt). The combined objective is Ltotal =Lflow +λL LSS . Pooled LSS uses the identical architecture but replaces the per-phase targets with a single mean-pooled episode embedding ((1)). The entire LSS apparatus (orange) is discarded at inference, leaving the unmodified base policy.

The full architecture is shown in Fig. 2 (the figure depicts the dense variant; pooled differs only in the alignment target). 

D. Dense LSS (phase-local alignment) 

Mean-pooling collapses both the K action tokens and the multi-phase rationale into single vectors, discarding temporal order and the per-phase causal content. Dense LSS preserves this structure. The rationale is segmented into P ordered phases from a fixed vocabulary ( approach , grip , rotate , with-draw ), each carrying its own one-sentence causal rationale and a frame range, and each T5-encoded and masked-mean-pooled into a per-phase target ep. Each action token spans a fixed number of frames ( upsample_rate =3 ) and is assigned to the phase those frames fall in; the ∼5% of tokens whose frames straddle a phase boundary are masked out of the loss. The LSAHead is then applied per token and each token aligned to the target of its own phase: 

Ldense = 1

|M| 

X

> i∈M



1 − gϕ(zi) · ep(i)

∥gϕ(zi)∥ ∥ ep(i)∥



, (2) where p(i) is token i’s phase and M is the clean (non-straddling) token set. The cosine objective is identical to (1); only the target changes, from one pooled embedding to a phase-local one (Fig. 3). The pooled and dense paths are otherwise interchangeable. Caveat: Dense LSS depends on reliable phase boundaries—noisy segmentation can misalign tokens and underperform pooling, which is why pooled-vs-dense is an empirical question rather than a foregone win. 

E. Training-only design; zero inference overhead 

The entire LSS apparatus—the LSAHead, the reasoning-T5, and the alignment loss (pooled or dense)—is used only in 

Algorithm 1 Stage-2 training with Dense LSS  

> 1:

Input: backbone fθ , head gϕ, frozen T5 ET 5, phase-annotated human data D, weight λ 

> 2:

Precompute: per-phase targets ep ←

MeanPool( ET 5(Tp)) for all phases, cache  

> 3:

for each minibatch (x, a, phases ) ∼ D do  

> 4:

Z ← fθ (x) // 16 action tokens  

> 5:

Lflow ← flow-matching loss on Z, a  

> 6:

assign each token zi to its phase p(i); mask straddlers 

→ M  

> 7:

Ldense ← 1

> |M|

P

> i∈M

1 − cos( gϕ(zi), e p(i)) 

> 8:

update θ, ϕ by ∇(Lflow + λ L dense ) 

> 9:

end for  

> 10:

At inference: discard gϕ and ET 5; deploy fθ alone training. The LSAHead is never saved with the model and is never instantiated at inference; the reasoning encoder is never run. The deployed computation graph is exactly the unmodified base VLA, conditioned on a plain task instruction, so LSS adds zero cost over the base policy. Reasoning’s influence persists only in the trained backbone weights, not in any runtime module. Algorithm 1 summarizes the procedure. 

F. Reasoning annotation pipeline 

Per-trajectory rationales are generated offline by Gemini-3-flash, prompted to explain the causal structure of the manipulation—the object-state trigger and the physical response—rather than to narrate the motion. For Dense LSS, the model additionally returns the phase segmentation (phase labels with time-fraction ranges), later converted to action-Fig. 3: Dense LSS token-to-phase alignment. Each of the 16 action tokens Zt is assigned to the manipulation phase spanned by its frames (tokens straddling a boundary, e.g. the greyed slot, are masked by mt); color indicates the assigned phase (orange = grip, green = rotate; two representative phases shown). The per-phase reasoning text is encoded by a frozen T5 and mean-pooled into a target ephase (t). The head gϕ projects each token into T5 space and Ldense aligns it to the target of its own phase. 

frame ranges. Phase boundaries are validated primarily by VLM-vs-human video comparison; a kinematic cross-check is recorded as a diagnostic only. We apply no formal quality control on the generated text, which we flag as a limitation. IV. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Setup 

We evaluate on RoboTwin 2.0 [16] with the aloha-agilex 14-DOF configuration (Fig. 4b). Following the benchmark’s standard protocol, every Stage-3 finetune uses an identical budget of 50 HDF5 episodes and 22,000 steps, so that runs differ only in the Stage-2 backbone they start from. Success rates are reported over 100 rollouts. 

B. Data collection 

Human demonstrations are collected on a teleoperation rig that produces data in the EgoDex format [17]. An Apple Vision Pro records the operator’s 48-D hand and wrist motion, while a separate head-mounted ZED stereo camera captures the front-view RGB stream. The ZED is required because Apple does not open-source the Vision Pro’s on-device recording module, so pose and video are captured by distinct devices and synchronized in our data pipeline, which builds on the human-policy framework of [18]. Using this rig we collected 500 adjust_bottle episodes (Fig. 4a) in a balanced 2 × 2

design—125 episodes for each combination of hand (left, right) and bottle instance (Coke, Sprite)—yielding 250 left-hand and 250 right-hand demonstrations. Each episode is pro-cessed into the unified 48-D human action representation used for Stage-2 pretraining; reasoning text is Gemini-generated causal rationale.                      

> (a) One adjust_bottle human demonstration (right hand), shown as its four manipulation phases: approach, grip, rotate, withdraw. Teleoperated via Apple Vision Pro; these phases define the dense alignment targets.
> (b) RoboTwin 2.0 evaluation tasks (aloha-agilex, 14-DOF), shown as four frames per task. The three tasks form asimilarity gradient relative to the adjust_bottle human pretraining data: adjust_bottle (top, in-distribution), shake_bottle (middle, a related bottle-manipulation task), and move_can_pot (bottom, a structurally dissimilar task), probing near-and far-transfer from the same Stage-2 backbone. Fig. 4: Human demonstration data (top) and simulation evaluation environ-ment (bottom).

C. Main ablation ladder 

Table I isolates the LSS mechanism on the in-distribution task. Two comparisons are load-bearing. First, aligning to a trivial instruction-text target collapses performance (58%) far below aligning to genuine reasoning (Pooled LSS, 85%): the 

content of the alignment target, not the mere presence of an auxiliary loss, drives the gain. Second, supplying the same reasoning text as a language input (Run C, 71%) or via a token-prediction loss (Run D, 74%) underperforms embedding alignment—reasoning helps as an alignment signal, not as generated or conditioned text. Run C even falls below the AVP-only baseline (Run B, 79%), consistent with reasoning text acting as distracting input when the model is not given an objective that uses it. Dense LSS attains the best result (90%), establishing alignment granularity as a further lever beyond reasoning content. Run F (frozen backbone) confirms the priors live in the backbone weights, not the discarded head.            

> TABLE I: Ablation ladder on adjust_bottle (RoboTwin 2.0,
> demo_randomized , 100 rollouts). The 58% →85% gap (trivial target vs. Run E) shows the alignment target matters, not merely the presence of an auxiliary loss.

Run Mechanism AVP Reas. Succ. (%) A EgoDex pretrain + finetune (baseline) – – 70 B AVP kinematics, no reasoning ✓ – 79 C Reasoning as language input ✓ ✓ 71 D Reasoning via token-prediction loss ✓ ✓ 74 E Pooled LSS (proposed) ✓ ✓ 85 

– LSS to trivial instruction text ✓ – 58 F Run E Stage 2, frozen at finetune ✓ ✓ 0G Dense LSS (proposed) ✓ ✓ 90 

D. Transfer and alignment granularity 

The core result tests whether LSS-shaped representations generalize to tasks not seen during Stage-2 alignment . We run an identical Stage-3 finetune on each held-out task from four Stage-2 backbones: R1 (H-RDT baseline), R2 (+AVP, no LSS), R3 (+Pooled LSS), R4 (+Dense LSS). Because R2–R4 share the same AVP data and differ only in the alignment objective, any R3/R4 gap over R2 is attributable to LSS rather than to the human data or task matching. Table II shows the pattern. Dense LSS (R4) gives the best result on every task, in-distribution and held-out. Pooled LSS (R3), by contrast, helps the matched task but fails to transfer: it regresses on shake_bottle (39 vs. R2’s 45) and is essentially flat on move_can_pot (19 vs. 20). This is the granularity claim concretized—collapsing phase structure into one episode embedding over-specializes the representation to the alignment task, whereas phase-local alignment carries over. All baselines (R1) are reproduced on our hardware under the identical 50-episode / 22,000-step protocol, so every column in Table II is directly comparable. 

E. Mechanism probe 

As supporting evidence for why Dense LSS transfers, we probe the backbone’s action-token hidden states (not the discarded head) on the adjust_bottle human-pretraining data and measure how strongly the LSS-induced representa-tional change separates by phase, using a silhouette score. Dense LSS yields roughly twice the phase separability of Pooled LSS (silhouette 0.047 vs. 0.021 against the AVP-only baseline; 0.037 vs. 0.016 against the H-RDT baseline). The 

> TABLE II: Transfer to held-out tasks (success rate %, 100 rollouts). Columns are Stage-2 backbones: R1 = H-RDT baseline, R2 = +human data (no LSS), R3 = +Pooled LSS, R4 = +Dense LSS. All share an identical 50-episode / 22,000-step Stage-3 finetune, so the only difference is the Stage-2 alignment objective. Dense LSS gives the best result on every task; Pooled LSS helps the in-distribution task but does not transfer.

Held-out task R1 R2 R3 R4 

adjust_bottle (in-dist.) 70 79 85 90 

shake_bottle 34 45 39 54 

move_can_pot 9.1 20 19 26   

> Fig. 5: Per-phase separability of the LSS-induced representational change on
> adjust_bottle . Under the same small alignment budget ( λ=0 .1), Dense LSS yields ∼2×the silhouette of Pooled LSS; absolute values are small by design. Supporting evidence for phase-local shaping.

absolute values are small by design: with λ=0 .1, LSS is a deliberately weak secondary pressure that must not override action prediction, so it shifts the representation only slightly (and the per-phase targets are themselves only modestly dis-tinct, mean pairwise cosine 0.70). The informative quantity is therefore the relative gap—under the identical small budget, dense separates phases about twice as strongly as pooled (Fig. 5). We treat this as supporting, not primary, evidence; the primary evidence is the behavioral transfer in Sec. IV-D. 

F. Inference cost 

A defining property of LSS is that the entire alignment apparatus—the LSAHead and the reasoning encoder—exists only during training and is discarded before deployment. The deployed policy is therefore the unmodified base VLA: its per-step latency and parameter count are identical to the H-RDT baseline, and it adds zero cost relative to a policy trained with-out LSS. This contrasts structurally with test-time reasoning methods, which re-incur their reasoning computation at every control step—generating reasoning tokens or predicting future states before each action—an overhead that recurs over the horizon and has motivated dedicated efficiency work [8], [9], [12]. LSS obtains the benefit of reasoning supervision while paying none of this recurring cost. V. L IMITATIONS 

Several limitations scope our claims. The Stage-2 alignment uses a single human pretraining task in a tabletop bottle-manipulation domain; broader generality across object cate-gories and skills is left to future work. Dense LSS depends on the quality of VLM-generated phase boundaries and rationales, for which we apply no formal quality control; noisy segmen-tation can in principle misalign tokens. Because LSS bakes reasoning into the weights, it offers no test-time replanning— it trades the adaptivity of generate-at-inference methods for their runtime cost. Finally, the mechanism probe reports small absolute separability values and is bounded by the distinctness of the reasoning targets; we treat it as supporting rather than decisive evidence. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We introduced Latent Semantic Scaffolding, a training-time auxiliary loss that aligns a VLA’s action-token representations to physical-reasoning embeddings and is discarded at infer-ence. Our central finding is that alignment granularity is the decisive lever: per-token, phase-local alignment (Dense LSS) transfers to held-out tasks where episode-pooled alignment over-specializes, and it does so at zero added inference cost. A representational probe supports phase-local shaping as the mechanism. Future work includes additional human-motion sources and object domains, and real-robot validation. REFERENCES [1] A. Brohan et al. , “RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 , 2023. [2] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti et al. , “OpenVLA: An open-source vision-language-action model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 , 2024. [3] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn, N. Fusai, L. Groom, K. Hausman, B. Ichter et al. , “ π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 ,2024, rSS 2025. [4] A. Khazatsky, K. Pertsch et al. , “DROID: A large-scale in-the-wild robot manipulation dataset,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12945 , 2024. [5] H. Bi, L. Wu, T. Lin, H. Tan, Z. Su, H. Su, and J. Zhu, “H-RDT: Human manipulation enhanced bimanual robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23523 , 2025. [6] R. Yang, Q. Yu, Y. Wu, R. Yan, B. Li, A.-C. Cheng, X. Zou, Y. Fang, H. Yin, S. Liu, S. Han, Y. Lu, and X. Wang, “EgoVLA: Learning vision-language-action models from egocentric human videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.12440 , 2025. [7] H. Luo, Y. Feng, W. Zhang, S. Zheng, Y. Wang, H. Yuan, J. Liu, C. Xu, Q. Jin, and Z. Lu, “Being-H0: Vision-language-action pretraining from large-scale human videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15597 , 2025. [8] Q. Zhao, Y. Lu, M. J. Kim, Z. Fu, Z. Zhang, Y. Wu, Z. Li, Q. Ma, S. Han, C. Finn, A. Handa, M.-Y. Liu, D. Xiang, G. Wetzstein, and T.-Y. Lin, “CoT-VLA: Visual chain-of-thought reasoning for vision-language-action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.22020 , 2025, cVPR 2025. [9] M. Zawalski, W. Chen, K. Pertsch, O. Mees, C. Finn, and S. Levine, “Robotic control via embodied chain-of-thought reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08693 , 2024, coRL 2024. [10] J. Cen, C. Yu, H. Yuan, Y. Jiang, S. Huang, J. Guo, X. Li, Y. Song, H. Luo, F. Wang, D. Zhao, and H. Chen, “WorldVLA: Towards autoregressive action world model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.21539 ,2025. [11] Z. Zhang, Z. Li, B. Rahmati, R. H. Yang, Y. Ma, A. Rasouli, S. Pak-damansavoji, Y. Wu, L. Zhang, T. Cao, F. Wen, X. Wang, X. Quan, and Y. Zhang, “Do world action models generalize better than VLAs? a robustness study,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.22078 , 2026. [12] Z. Duan, Y. Zhang, S. Geng, G. Liu, J. Boedecker, and C. X. Lu, “Fast ECoT: Efficient embodied chain-of-thought via thoughts reuse,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07639 , 2025. [13] Open X-Embodiment Collaboration, “Open X-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and RT-X models,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2024. [14] Z. Zhang, Y. He, Y. Sun, J. Shi, L. Liu, and Q. Nie, “RoboAct-CLIP: Video-driven pre-training of atomic action understanding for robotics,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02069 , 2025, iROS 2025. [15] S. Yu, S. Kwak, H. Jang, J. Jeong, J. Huang, J. Shin, and S. Xie, “Rep-resentation alignment for generation: Training diffusion transformers is easier than you think,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06940 , 2024, iCLR 2025. [16] T. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chen, Z. Cai, Y. Liu, Z. Li, Q. Liang, X. Lin, Y. Ge, Z. Gu et al. , “RoboTwin 2.0: A scalable data generator and benchmark with strong domain randomization for robust bimanual robotic manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18088 , 2025. [17] R. Hoque, P. Huang, D. J. Yoon, M. Sivapurapu, and J. Zhang, “EgoDex: Learning dexterous manipulation from large-scale egocentric video,” 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11709 , 2025. [18] R.-Z. Qiu, S. Yang, X. Cheng, C. Chawla, J. Li, T. He, G. Yan, D. J. Yoon, R. Hoque, L. Paulsen, G. Yang, J. Zhang, S. Yi, G. Shi, and X. Wang, “Humanoid policy ∼ human policy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13441 , 2025.