Title: Amortized Low-Rank Adaptation for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.12278v1

Published Time: Mon, 14 Sep 2026 00:20:20 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# AMORTIZED LOW -R ANK ADAPTATION FOR MODEL -BASED REINFORCEMENT LEARNING 

Fernando Palafox & David Fridovich-Keil 

University of Texas at Austin Austin, TX, USA 

{fernandopalafox,dfk}@utexas.edu 

## ABSTRACT 

World models let agents plan by predicting the consequences of their actions, but changes in the environment can make them inaccurate. We study the problem of adapting a world model to an unknown test-time environment, drawn from a known environment family, using only a few episodes of interaction. Existing ap-proaches trade off computational cost against expressivity, i.e., the range of mod-els a method can produce. For example, in-context learning is computationally cheap but limited in expressivity, and gradient-based adaptation is expressive but computationally expensive. We present CLAW ( Context-conditioned Low-rank 

Adaptation of World models), which addresses this tradeoff by using a hyper-network to generate low-rank (LoRA) adapters at test time. During pretraining, we simulate adaptation to a variety of environments and jointly train the hyper-network and base world model. At test time, we freeze the base model and use a forward pass of the hypernetwork to generate adapters from a small batch of test-time transitions. We evaluate CLAW in locomotion and manipulation en-vironment families that vary in dynamics, embodiment, and reward. We show that, using only seconds of test-time data, CLAW outperforms gradient-based adaptation and in-context learning during online adaptation. We also show that CLAW avoids overfitting in data-scarce regimes, that its advantage comes from the expressive adapters rather than context conditioning, and that pretraining the hypernetwork jointly with the base model outperforms training it post hoc. 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

In reinforcement learning (RL), learned world models allow agents to plan by predicting the con-sequences of their actions (Ha & Schmidhuber, 2018; Hafner et al., 2023; Hansen et al., 2024). However, changes in the environment can make a world model inaccurate, and it is often desirable to adapt it without collecting large test-time datasets. In this paper, we study the problem of adapting a world model to an unknown test-time environment drawn from a known environment family (e.g., a set of locomotion environments with varying dynamics, embodiments, or rewards). We cast this problem as a meta-reinforcement learning problem where we amortize adaptation dur-ing pretraining, enabling online adaptation with little data. Existing approaches face a tradeoff: they are either computationally cheap but limited in expressivity (e.g., in-context learning), or expres-sive but computationally expensive (e.g., gradient-based weight adaptation). We present CLAW (Context-conditioned Low-rank Adaptation of World models), an adaptation method which ad-dresses this tradeoff. CLAW uses hypernetworks (Ha et al., 2017), neural networks trained to pro-duce weights for other neural networks, to produce low-rank (LoRA) adapters (Hu et al., 2021) for the world model using a small batch of test-time transitions. This enables adaptation with the compu-tational efficiency of in-context learning while retaining the expressivity of weight-space adaptation. We validate CLAW with experiments in a variety of locomotion and manipulation environment families, where we vary dynamics, embodiments and rewards. We show that CLAW outperforms gradient-based and in-context learning baselines during online adaptation, that it avoids overfitting in data-scarce regimes, that its advantage comes from the expressivity of the generated adapters 1arXiv:2609.12278v1 [cs.LG] 10 Sep 2026 (rather than context conditioning), and that pretraining the hypernetwork jointly with the base model outperforms training it post hoc. 

## 2 RELATED WORK 

2.1 ADAPTATION IN MODEL -B ASED RL There are three main approaches to adapt a world model to test-time environments. The first ap-proach changes the model’s weights directly by, e.g., gradient-based re-training (Levy et al., 2025; 2026; Xu et al., 2025; Pfrommer et al., 2020; Lanier et al., 2025; Kim et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2025); the same approach, applied to policies rather than world models, also appears in model-free RL (Ball et al., 2023; Kostrikov et al., 2021; Yin et al., 2025; Amin et al., 2025). This approach is highly expressive (i.e., can produce a large range of models) at the cost of increased test-time compute and high sample complexity. The second approach infers a learned embedding of the test-time environment (e.g., a latent task variable, a belief, or context embedding) and conditions a fixed model on it (Rakelly et al., 2019; Zintgraf et al., 2019; 2018; Duan et al., 2016; Mishra et al., 2017; James et al., 2018; Kumar et al., 2021; Yu et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2021; Reed et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2022; Laskin et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2025). This approach is computationally inexpensive (embedding inference is often a single forward pass of a neural network) but limited in expressivity since the weights are fixed at test time. A third approach skips test-time adaptation entirely. Instead, it trains one model to be robust across an entire family of environments (Tobin et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2017; Andrychowicz et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020). This approach does not require test-time adaptation mechanisms, but sacrifices accuracy on the test-time environment for robustness across the whole family. Our approach, CLAW, is a combination of the first and second approaches. We use a test-time context embedding to generate low-rank adapters (Hu et al., 2021) that modify the model weights. CLAW takes the best of both approaches: model adaptation is nearly instantaneous (a single forward pass of the hypernetwork), and has the expressivity of full-weight finetuning, depending on the adapter rank. 2.2 SELECTING WHAT TO ADAPT 

During weight-based model adaptation, it is not always clear what weights within the model should be adapted. Some approaches adapt all the weights, e.g., TD-MPC2 adapts the entire model during online learning (Hansen et al., 2024). This has the benefit of maximum adaptation expressivity at the cost of increased test-time computation and potential model collapse (Smith et al., 2022a;b; Yin et al., 2025). Other approaches adapt specific world model modules, e.g., the dynamics module (Levy et al., 2026), or specific layers, e.g., the last layers (Levy et al., 2025; Harrison et al., 2018; Davydov et al., 2024). These approaches are computationally cheaper and avoid model collapse at the expense of manual module/layer selection and reduced adaptation expressivity. A third approach does not modify weights and instead modulates the model’s intermediate activations, e.g., FiLM’s feature-wise affine transforms (Perez et al., 2017). This also avoids manual selection, but limits adaptation to modulation of existing activations rather than a full weight-space update, which is more expressive (Jayakumar et al., 2020). Our approach is different because it inserts LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2021) into all layers of the world model. Therefore, we maintain most of the adaptation expressivity of full-model adaptation at a fraction of test-time compute cost. Moreover, the pretraining procedure (Algorithm 1) im-plicitly teaches the hypernetwork how strongly to adapt each layer, obviating the need for manual module/layer selection. 2.3 HYPERNETWORKS IN RL Hypernetworks have been used in meta-RL before (Finn et al., 2017; Nagabandi et al., 2018; Raghu et al., 2019) to replace test-time gradient descent with a forward pass of a neural network (Huang et al., 2020; Xian et al., 2021; Przewi˛ e´ zlikowski et al., 2022; Beck et al., 2023; Rezaei-Shoshtari 2et al., 2022; Beukman et al., 2023). These methods often produce full weight tensors (instead of LoRA adapters). In the domain of large language models (LLMs), existing work generates LoRA adapters from text prompts (Ye & Ren, 2021; Mahabadi et al., 2021; Ortiz-Barajas et al., 2024; Charakorn et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2024; Juki´ c et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2026). A recent paper (Bianchi et al., 2026) proposes generating LoRA adapters for a robot policy from a language instruction and a demo video. These are all forms of amortized optimization (Amos, 2023) in which a hypernetwork is trained to amortize test-time low-rank adaptation. Existing hypernetwork approaches either generate full model weights (which is expensive and/or intractable for large world models), or generate adapters from explicit task descriptions for a fixed pretrained model. Neither approach addresses efficient world model adaptation from test-time transi-tions. CLAW fills this gap by jointly pretraining the world model and hypernetwork to infer adapters directly from test-time interactions, enabling repeated, low-cost adaptation during deployment. 

## 3 PRELIMINARIES 

Each environment e is a Markov Decision Process (MDP), which we assume is drawn at test time from a uniform distribution p(E). For example, p(E) could assign probabilities to bipedal locomo-tion environments that differ in actuator strength. At each step t, the agent receives state st, selects an action, and receives reward rt together with the next state st+1 .We define two functions that produce the agent’s actions: policies and planners. Policies produce actions directly from states, i.e., at = π(st), and are often instantiated as neural networks. In contrast, planners select an action by evaluating candidate actions using a learned model of the MDP. That is, given world model parameters θ, a planner call is given by at = π(st, θ ), where we overload π for notational convenience in the next paragraph. Planners are often instantiated as sampling-based algorithms, e.g., MPPI (Williams et al., 2015). We refer to the tuple ζt = ( st, a t, r t, s t+1 ) as a transition. A trajectory τ = ( ζ0, ζ 1, . . . , ζ M −1)

collects a sequence of M transitions. p(τ | e, π ) denotes the distribution over trajectories induced by acting in environment e according to the policy or planner π. A batch of trajectories with size N is the tuple b = ( τ1, . . . , τ N ), where each trajectory is drawn independently and identically distributed from p(τ | e, π ). At test time, the agent interacts with environments from p(E) which it may or may not have encountered during pretraining. 3.1 WORLD MODEL 

World models are learned approximations of MDPs that agents can use to plan actions. They often consist of an encoder, a dynamics function, a value function, and a reward function (Hafner et al., 2019; 2023; Hansen et al., 2024; Levy et al., 2026). These modules are neural networks jointly trained using data from high-fidelity simulation or the real world. We refer to the parameters for all modules as θw, the base parameters. In this paper, the agent uses θw with a planner πupd to select actions, i.e., at = πupd (st, θ w). Figure 1 shows the control flow for action selection given a set of candidate actions.     

> Encoder Dynamics Reward Value
> stzt
> at
> zt+1
> rt+1
> vt+1
> Figure 1: A single forward pass of a world model used to plan by maximizing predicted return. Blocks in red have trainable parameters, which constitute θw.

First, the encoder produces a latent state zt from an environment state st. Then, the dynamics module predicts the next latent state zt+1 given 

zt and at. Next, the reward and value modules use zt+1 to compute the reward rt+1 and value 

vt+1 . Finally, the planner ranks at using the estimated return rt+1 +γ v t+1 , where γ ∈ [0 , 1) 

is the discount factor. In this paper, we apply our method, CLAW, to the TD-MPC2 world model architecture (Hansen et al., 2024) because it consistently achieves strong 3performance across a variety of continuous control tasks using a single set of hyperparameters. 1 We emphasize that CLAW is agnostic to world model architecture since our only requirement is that we can sample environments during pretraining and insert LoRA adapters into world model modules. Therefore, CLAW can be applied to, e.g., action-conditioned JEPA world models (Maes et al., 2026; Assran et al., 2025) or Dreamer-style architectures (Hafner et al., 2019; 2023). 3.2 LOW -R ANK ADAPTATION 

At test time, the base parameters θw stay frozen and we insert LoRA adapters (Hu et al., 2021) into the world model’s layers. Concretely, for an adapted layer with base weight matrix W0 ∈ Rdout ×din ,where dout and din are the layer’s output and input dimensions, the effective weight is 

W = W0 + AB, A ∈ Rdout ×dr , B ∈ Rdr ×din , dr ≪ min( dout , d in ). (1) The factors A and B constitute the adapter, and dr is the low-rank bottleneck dimension. We define 

ϕw as the collection of all A, B factors across the adapted layers. For simplicity, we adapt all world model layers and keep rank dr constant. 3.3 HYPERNETWORKS 

A hypernetwork is a neural network Hθh that outputs the weights of another network (Ha et al., 2017). Given an input x, the target network parameters ϕ are produced as 

ϕ = Hθh (x), (2) where θh are the weights for the hypernetwork. In the next section, we present more details on the architecture and training procedure for our LoRA-generating hypernetwork. 

## 4 APPROACH 

We now present CLAW, a model-based RL adaptation algorithm that uses a hypernetwork to gen-erate low-rank adapters at test time. This section is structured as follows: First, we detail the archi-tecture of our hypernetwork (Section 4.1). Then, we describe a pretraining procedure to jointly train the base model and hypernetwork (Section 4.2). 4.1 HYPERNET -B ASED ADAPTER GENERATION 

We use a hypernetwork to generate LoRA adapters for each environment, online at test time. Using a context batch bcon of Ncon trajectories of M transitions each, it generates LoRA adapters ϕw for the world model’s base weights θw. Formally: 

ϕw = Hθh (bcon ). (3) We now describe the architecture of H and how bcon is used to generate ϕw.

> 1

TD-MPC2 pretrains a model-free policy to seed a sampling-based planner. To avoid confusion, we include the parameters for this policy within θw .  

> hemb
> hemb
> mean pool
> hcon
> ζ1
> ζM
> bcon uemb
> hgen
> ucon
> context embedding
> uk
> chunk embedding
> 1
> k
> K
> ∆ϕw
> +ϕw
> ∆ϕw
> ϕ0
> template

Figure 2: Forward pass of the hypernetwork Hθh when generating chunk k of ∆ϕw using a batch bcon of Ncon trajectories, each with M transitions. In the bcon block, depth represents the batch dimension. Blocks in red have trainable parameters which constitute θh.

4First, we generate an embedding uemb for each transition ζ ∈ bcon using a small multi-layer per-ceptron (MLP) hemb . Then, we average the embeddings and feed them into a second MLP hcon 

to produce a context embedding ucon that identifies the environment. Note that embedding each transition independently, then averaging, discards information about transition order. Once we have identified the environment with ucon , we feed it into hgen , an MLP, to generate ∆ϕw,which is added to a learned template ϕ0 to produce ϕw, i.e., 

ϕw = ϕ0 + ∆ ϕw. (4) Templates have been shown to improve learning performance in hypernetworks (Beck et al., 2023). Generating ∆ϕw from a single forward pass would require an impractically large generator network 

hgen . Instead, hgen is a small network we reuse to generate ∆ϕw in chunks. Concretely, following Von Oswald et al. (2020), we divide ∆ϕw into K chunks and generate chunk k by feeding the chunk embedding uk and the context embedding ucon into hgen . Figure 2 illustrates the full procedure. 4.2 AMORTIZING LOW -R ANK ADAPTATION 

We now describe the procedure to jointly pretrain the world model and hypernetwork, and thereby amortize test-time low-rank adaptation. At a high level, CLAW wraps a standard world model pretraining algorithm with a loop that iterates between environments sampled from an environment family. This allows us to train the hypernetwork to generate adapters for each environment. In the following subsections we explain: 1) a single-environment training step for the base model and hypernetwork parameters (i.e., θw, θh), 2) a training loss that averages over environments, thus meta-training the base and hypernetwork for online adaptation, and 3) the full pretraining algorithm, instantiated for the TD-MPC2 architecture (Hansen et al., 2024).      

> CLAW
> Planner
> πupd
> Environment
> Bj
> upd
> Loss function L
> θw
> Data collection policy πcon
> Context
> Bj
> con
> Hypernet
> Hθh
> θh
> L(θw, ϕ w, b upd )
> bupd bcon
> ϕw
> LoRA adapters

Figure 3: Computing the loss L for envi-ronment j during CLAW pretraining. Green marks what CLAW adds to standard world model pretraining loss computation. Red marks trainable parameters and their gradi-ent path, and ticks mark a stopped gradient. CLAW can be applied to any world model training algorithm with the same high-level computation graph. 

Single-Environment Training Step. Given environ-ment j, we start by filling two buffers: Bj

> con

, a context buffer containing trajectories collected using a context-collection policy πcon , and Bj

> upd

, a buffer containing tra-jectories collected using the agent’s planner, πupd . Next, we sample a batch bcon of Ncon trajectories from Bj

> con

and produce environment-specific low-rank adapters us-ing the hypernetwork, i.e., ϕw = Hθh (bcon ). Then, we combine θw and ϕw per (1), and use a batch bupd of Nupd 

trajectories sampled from Bj 

> upd

to compute the loss L (de-tailed in the next section). Finally, we differentiate L with respect to θw and θh, and update θw and θh with an Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014). The result is a hypernetwork trained to produce low-rank adapters ϕw for θw using bcon , and a base model trained to be adapted with ϕw. A visualization of this procedure can be seen in Fig. 3. Our method collects bcon using the context-collection pol-icy πcon instead of the agent’s planner. There are two rea-sons for this approach: 1. It ensures the distribution of context trajectories is the same during training and testing, facilitat-ing environment identification for the hypernet-work H.2. In future work, we can directly optimize the pol-icy πcon to produce trajectories bcon which are better at identifying the environment and/or lead to better test-time performance. In our experiments, πcon is always a random-action policy. This fixes context data quality across adaptation baselines so that performance differences reflect the adaptation method rather than the 5collected context data. However, practitioners may choose to use a different policy, e.g., one that is safe for real-life deployment (but not necessarily high-performing). The use of a non-random πcon 

is fully supported by CLAW as long as πcon can be queried during pretraining. 

Multi-Environment Training Loss. The loss in Fig. 3 decomposes as 

L(θw, ϕ w, b upd ) = LTDMPC2 (Θ w, b upd ) + λ∥ϕw∥22, (5) where Θw are the merged base and adapter weights per (1), λ ∈ R≥0 weighs the adapter’s L2

penalty, and LTDMPC2 is the training loss for a TDMPC2 world model described by Hansen et al. (2024). If a different world model architecture is used, LTDMPC2 may be replaced with the corre-sponding loss. Figure 3 computes a single-environment, single-batch approximation of the objective in the following minimization problem: 

min  

> θw, θ h

Ee

 Ebcon , b upd [L] , (6) where e ∼ p(E), and bcon and bupd are batches of Ncon and Nupd trajectories, respectively. Each trajectory is drawn i.i.d. from p(τ | e, π con ) and p(τ | e, π upd ), respectively.                                                                                                                      

> Algorithm 1: CLAW + TD-MPC2 pretraining
> Input: Environment family {E1, . . . , E n}, context-collection pol-icy πcon , initial θw, θ h, total training steps T
> // Context data collection
> 1: for j= 1 , . . . , n do
> 2: Init. and fill Bj
> con by acting in Ejwith πcon
> // Update data prefill
> 3: for j= 1 , . . . , n do
> 4: Init. and fill Bj
> upd by acting in Ejwith πupd
> // Online Interaction and Training Loop
> 5: i∼Uniform( {1, . . . , n })▷Sample rollout env. 6: s←Ei.reset()
> 7: for t= 1 , . . . , T do
> 8: k∼Uniform( {1, . . . , n })▷Sample training env.
> // Update base and hypernet parameters
> 9: bupd ←Sample( Bk
> upd )
> 10: bcon ←Sample( Bk
> con )
> 11: ϕw←Hθh(bcon )▷Training env. adapters 12: Θw←(θw, ϕ w)▷Merge adapters 13:  θw, θ h
> ←TDMPC2U PDATE (bupd , b con ,Θw, θ h)
> // Plan and act
> 14: bi
> con ←Sample( Bi
> con )
> 15: ϕw←Hθh(bi
> con )▷Rollout env. adapters 16: Θw←(θw, ϕ w)
> 17: a←πupd (s, Θw)▷Plan with latest parameters 18: s′, r, done ←Ei.step( a)
> // Update environment and buffers
> 19: Bi
> upd ←Bi
> upd ∪ { (s, a, r, s ′)}
> 20: if done then
> 21: i∼Uniform( {1, . . . , n })▷Sample rollout env. 22: s←Ei.reset()
> 23: else
> 24: s←s′
> Output: θw, θ h

Problem (6) illustrates how our method can be applied to any world model architecture. If we remove bcon and the λ∥ϕw∥22 term, the inner ex-pectation of (6) is the objective of a standard world model training problem. Our approach, CLAW, defines the hypernetwork machinery (green box in Fig. 3), and uses it to amortize low-rank adaptation by wrapping the standard objective with an expectation over the environ-ment family p(E).

Applying CLAW to the TD-MPC2 Archi-tecture. Algorithm 1 shows the TD-MPC2 (Hansen et al., 2024) pretraining algorithm modified to use CLAW. It includes the fol-lowing additions: 1) logic to sample a roll-out environment from p(E) every episode, thereby approximating the outer expectation in (6); 2) logic to sample a training environ-ment from p(E) every step, thereby stabiliz-ing multi-environment training; 3) a buffer Bj

> con

per environment j with corresponding samples 

bcon , and 4) a forward pass of Hθh to produce adapters ϕw given bcon .We denote additions to the original TD-MPC2 algorithm with green highlights in Al-gorithm 1. Our algorithm uses a modi-fied version of the TD-MPC2 weight update, TDMPC2U PDATE , which we include as Al-gorithm 2 in Appendix A. The result of Algo-rithm 1 is a base TD-MPC2 model and hyper-net that can generate test-time LoRA adapters for any layer of the base model. We emphasize that CLAW can be applied regardless of the chosen world model architecture or training algorithm. Specifically, an adapter-generating hypernetwork can be trained as long as one can sample environments, maintain a buffer for each of them, and maintain an unbroken gradient chain between the loss and hypernetwork (as shown by the red lines in Fig. 3). 6Family Robot Objective Environment property # Environments Walker Walker2d Walk forward Actuator strength 20 Reach Meta-World arm Reach target position Goal position 6Push Meta-World arm Place puck at goal Puck goal position 6Cheetah Half-Cheetah Run Running direction 2Cheetah/Walker Half-Cheetah / Walker2d Run forward Robot embodiment 2

Table 1: Environment families used in our experiments, adapted from DeepMind Control Suite (Tassa et al., 2018) and Meta-World (Yu et al., 2019). The environment property col-umn lists the property that varies between environments in a family. 

## 5 EXPERIMENTS 

We test CLAW on the environment families shown in Table 1, where each family consists of a set of environments that differ in one property. We use 5 seeds per experiment and report 95% confidence intervals for the mean across seeds, computed with Student’s t distribution. Appendix B lists the architecture, optimization, and per-experiment hyperparameters needed to reproduce every experiment below. We will include a public codebase in the final version of this paper. 5.1 EXPERIMENT 1: O NLINE ADAPTATION 

Question. How does CLAW’s performance compare to online, gradient-based adaptation? 

Setup. For each environment in a family, we begin by collecting 3 episodes of context data with 

πcon (7.5–75s of data depending on the environment). Then, we roll out a pretrained model, adapting it at every step using the context data. Gradient-based baselines take one gradient step per environ-ment step, adapting a set of LoRA adapters. On the other hand, CLAW uses its hypernetwork to generate new LoRA adapters at every environment step. We report episode return (or success rate) averaged across environments and seeds. 

Baselines. We compare CLAW against adaptation on models trained on a single task (ST) or with Domain Randomization (DR; Tobin et al., 2017). DR pretrains a base model on all environments in the family, and ST pretrains a base model on a single environment in the family. We also compare against a non-adapting oracle baseline, which appends the environment’s ground-truth parameter directly to the state, e.g., actuator strength, or running direction (specified with a one-hot vector). Since every other method must infer this parameter from context data, the oracle’s performance serves as a ceiling on the performance achievable with perfect environment identification. World model hyperparameters are fixed across baselines. 

Results. Results are shown in Fig. 4. In all families, CLAW closely tracks the oracle’s performance. In the manipulation families (Push and Reach), DR and ST climb toward that ceiling, but they take many environment steps to get there, and performance is very noisy. In Walker, DR and ST get worse instead of catching up. In Cheetah, ST catches up but DR does not. DR’s low performance is likely due to Cheetah’s two running directions forming a bimodal distribution of behavior, which DR training resolves into a single “average” model that is not good at either behavior. 

Figure 4: Experiment 1. Episode return (or success rate) vs. test-time environment steps, averaged over all environments in a family. 

7Figure 5: Experiment 2. CLAW’s single hypernetwork pass (red) vs. gradient-based baselines (DR, ST, oracle) as a function of SGD steps. 

5.2 EXPERIMENT 2: A DAPTATION WHEN DATA IS LIMITED 

Question. Given that test-time data is often expensive and/or scarce, how does CLAW’s perfor-mance compare to the return achieved by applying many steps of gradient-based adaptation on a fixed test-time dataset? 

Setup. For each family and environment, we collect 3 episodes of context data using πcon (between 7.5 and 75 seconds depending on the environment). Then, we use this data to adapt all methods offline, freeze the models, and evaluate them. For the gradient-based adaptation baselines, we sweep a range of offline gradient steps, thereby testing how performance changes as a function of offline adaptation. We report the same metrics as Experiment 1. 

Baselines. As in Experiment 1, we compare to DR, ST, and an oracle, here also swept over adapta-tion gradient steps. 

Results. Results are shown in Fig. 5. CLAW mostly tracks oracle performance, and outperforms other baselines. Moreover, as the number of SGD steps increases, performance collapses for all gradient-based methods as they overfit to the data. This is supported by the collapse of the oracle: since it already knows the environment, the only thing left for it to fit is noise in the small dataset. 5.3 EXPERIMENT 3: C OMPARISON TO IN-C ONTEXT LEARNING     

> Figure 6: Experiment 3. Left: return vs. model size. Right:
> reward relative to CLAW.

Question. Does CLAW’s performance depend on generating expressive world-model adapters, or merely conditioning on the context embedding? How does this relationship change with model size? 

Setup. For each environment in the Cheetah/Walker family in Table 1, we roll out one episode adapting at every timestep (as in previous experiments). We choose this family because we need a harder family than the others to tell the in-context baselines apart. Cheetah/Walker provides this since state and action spaces differ com-pletely across environments. We also sweep over model size and report the same evaluation metrics as Experiment 1. 

Baselines. We compare against two in-context learning baselines that condition a fixed model on context, rather than adapting its weights, to isolate the source of CLAW’s performance. Concate-nation (Concat) feeds the hypernetwork’s context embedding directly into the world model’s state (instead of using it to generate adapters); this is akin to the approaches of Kumar et al. (2021); Rakelly et al. (2019); Liu et al. (2025). We also compare to a hypernetwork trained to generate FiLM parameters (Perez et al., 2017), which scale and shift features. 

Results. Results are shown in Fig. 6. At the smallest sizes, no method learns enough to separate performance. At the largest sizes, the base model has enough capacity to represent every environ-ment without conditioning, so performance does not separate either. CLAW’s advantage is clearest 8at intermediate sizes where it outperforms both baselines. These results align with those of Jayaku-mar et al. (2020), who predict that hypernetwork-generated weights are more expressive than the conditioning mechanisms of FiLM and Concat. 5.4 EXPERIMENT 4: L ORA R ANK SENSITIVITY 

Question. For a fixed model size, how does CLAW’s performance change with LoRA rank? 

Setup. We fix the model size and pretrain a hypernetwork with CLAW for a range of LoRA ranks. We use the Cheetah/Walker family and select an intermediate size where in-context baseline perfor-mance is separable. As LoRA rank increases, we increase the number of chunk embeddings K in Fig. 2 and keep all other hyperparameters fixed. This controls for hypernetwork capacity, so any performance change reflects the rank increase, not a larger generator network. Then, we evaluate online adaptation performance as in Experiment 1.    

> Figure 7: Experiment 4. Top:
> return vs. LoRA rank. Bottom:
> return vs. adapter size as a per-centage of the base parameter count.

Baselines. We compare against the same in-context learning base-lines as Experiment 3. 

Results. Results are shown in Fig. 7. We report performance vs. adapter rank and adapter size as a percentage of the base parameter count. CLAW’s performance rises with rank and percentage. On the parameter axis, FiLM outperforms CLAW at low budgets, and CLAW needs around four times FiLM’s parameter budget to match its return. Past that budget, CLAW surpasses FiLM, whose perfor-mance stays constant since it has no comparable knob to spend a larger budget on. 5.5 EXPERIMENT 5: P OST -H OC HYPERNET COMPARISON 

Question. How does training the base model and hypernetwork jointly (CLAW) compare to training a hypernetwork on top of a frozen pretrained base model (cf. Bianchi et al., 2026)? 

Setup. We evaluate performance on Cheetah using the same metrics as previous experiments. The post-hoc hypernet’s total number of training steps and training data match what CLAW would see for this family (500k steps total, split between both environments).  

> Figure 8: Experiment 5. Chee-tah return for CLAW vs. post-hoc baseline.

Baseline. First, we pretrain a plain TD-MPC2 base on Walker only for 250k steps. Then, we freeze it and train a hypernetwork for 250k steps to generate adapters for the Cheetah environment. We refer to this as the “post-hoc hypernet.” This matches the approach proposed by Bianchi et al. (2026), who train a hypernetwork to generate LoRA adapters using a frozen robotics foundation model. 

Results. Results are shown in Fig. 8. CLAW outperforms a post-hoc hypernet, showing that jointly training the base model and hypernet-work leads to better performance. 

## 6 CONCLUSION , L IMITATIONS , AND FUTURE WORK 

We introduce CLAW, a method for world model adaptation that uses a hypernetwork to generate LoRA adapters online, replacing gradient-based test-time adaptation. Across all tested environment families, CLAW outperforms online gradient-based and in-context learning baselines. Moreover, under limited data, CLAW avoids the overfitting that degrades gradient-based approaches. We also present ablations showing that CLAW’s performance comes from generating world model adapters rather than merely conditioning on a context embedding, that performance improves with LoRA 9rank, and that training the hypernetwork jointly with the base model outperforms training it post hoc. CLAW is limited by the identifiability of the environment when using the data-collection policy 

πcon . Additionally, CLAW learns to generate adapters only for the environments seen during pre-training. Future work includes pretraining and/or architectural improvements for better generaliza-tion, applying CLAW to sim-to-real transfer, optimizing the data-collection policy for downstream performance, and algorithmically selecting which environments to train on (Dennis et al., 2020). 10 AI U SE STATEMENT 

We used generative AI to implement methods and for general coding assistance, to edit and format this paper, and to summarize existing literature and surface relevant work we had not considered. We did not use generative AI for any other task. We have reviewed all AI-assisted work. We take responsibility for the final content of this work, including text, claims or artifacts produced with the aid of generative AI. 

## ETHICS STATEMENT 

We are not aware of any ethical concerns raised by this work. 

## REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT 

Appendix B reports every hyperparameter used to reproduce our experiments. We will also include a code base with instructions on how to run every experiment in this paper. 11 A TDMPC2U PDATE : W ORLD MODEL AND POLICY UPDATE 

Algorithm 2 is the TD-MPC2 weight update (Hansen et al., 2024) modified to train the hypernetwork alongside the base model. It runs in two phases. The first phase computes the world model loss and updates the world model base slice θwm  

> w

jointly with the hypernetwork parameters θh. The second phase computes the policy loss and updates the policy base slice θπw, again jointly with θh. Between the two phases we regenerate the policy adapter ϕπw with the updated hypernetwork, so the policy loss uses the adapter the current hypernetwork produces. The update ends by refreshing the target critic and the Q-scale. The target critic EMA tracks base weights only, since its adapter is regenerated on every call. 

Algorithm 2 TDMPC2U PDATE — world model, policy, and hypernetwork update 

Input: bupd , b con , Θw = ( θw, ϕ w), where ϕw = ( ϕwm  

> w

, ϕ πw) are the world-model and policy adapter slices, θh

1: z ← encode( bupd , Θw)

2: LTDMPC2 , wm ← TDMPC2WorldModelLoss( bupd , z, Θw)

3: θwm  

> w

, θ πw ← θw ▷ break out world-model and policy slices 4:  θwm  

> w′

, θ ′

> h

 ← Optimizer  (θwm  

> w

, θ h ), ∇(θwm   

> w,θ h)

LTDMPC2 , wm 



5: θ′ 

> w

← (θwm  

> w′

, θ πw)

6: ϕπw′ ← Hθ′ 

> h

(bcon ) ▷ Refresh policy adapter 7: Θ′ 

> w

← (θ′

> w

, (ϕwm  

> w

, ϕ πw′)) 

8: LTDMPC2 , π ← TDMPC2PolicyLoss( sg (z), Q (sg (Θ ′

> w

)) , Θ′

> w

)

9:  θπw′, θ ′′ 

> h

 ← Optimizer 



(θπw, θ ′ 

> h

), ∇(θπw ,θ ′ 

> h)

LTDMPC2 , π 



10: θ′′  

> w

← (θwm  

> w′

, θ πw′), Θ′′  

> w

← (θ′′ 

> w

, (ϕwm  

> w

, ϕ πw′)) 

11: Update target critic: EMA the critic base into a persistent variable; adapter regenerated fresh, not EMA’d 12: Update Q-scale 

Output: θ′′ 

> w

, θ ′′ 

> h

12 B HYPERPARAMETERS AND EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 

This appendix reports every hyperparameter needed to reproduce our experiments. Tables 2 and 3 give the architecture, adapter, optimization, and planning hyperparameters shared by all methods and experiments unless a table below states otherwise. Tables 4 to 6 cover Experiments 1 and 2, which share pretrained checkpoints across the Walker, Reach, Push, and Cheetah families. Tables 7 to 9 cover Experiments 3, 4, and 5, which all use the Cheetah/Walker family. B.1 SHARED ARCHITECTURE AND ADAPTER HYPERPARAMETERS 

Component Value 

Encoder 

Hidden features 256, 512 SimNorm groups / temperature 8 / 1.0 

Dynamics 

Hidden features 512, 512, 512 SimNorm groups / temperature 8 / 1.0 

Critic 

Hidden features 512, 512 Ensemble size / subsampled per target 5 / 2 Return bins / range 101 / [−10 , 10] 

Dropout 0.01 

Policy 

Hidden features 512, 512 Log-std range [−10 , 2] 

Reward 

Hidden features 512, 512 Bins / range 101 / [−10 , 10] 

Hypernetwork Hθh (Section 4.1) Context dimension C 64 Transition-embedding MLP hemb hidden width 256 Generator MLP hgen hidden width 128 Chunk size c (parameters per generated chunk) 64 Chunk-embedding dimension 32 

Table 2: Network architecture, shared by CLAW and all baselines (DR, ST, oracle), and by every experiment and family unless overridden in Tables 7 and 8. The number of hypernetwork chunks is K = ⌈Nadapt /c ⌉, where Nadapt is the number of parameters in ϕw ; it grows auto-matically with LoRA rank (Section 5.4). 

Parameter Value 

TD-MPC2 loss and optimizer (Algorithm 2) Optimizer Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2014) Learning rate (world model / encoder / policy) 3e-4 / 9e-5 / 3e-4 Hypernetwork learning rate (CLAW only) 3e-4 Gradient clip norm 20 Planning horizon 3Discount factor γ 0.99 Temporal decay 0.5 Target critic EMA decay 0.99 Consistency / reward / value / entropy coefficients 20.0 / 0.1 / 0.1 / 1e-4 Adapter regularization weight λ ((5)) 0.01 Batch size 256 Initial SGD burst before rollout begins 1,000 steps 

Planner (MPPI (Williams et al., 2015)) 

Horizon 3Iterations 6Population size 512 Policy-seeded trajectories 24 Temperature 0.5 Action noise std range [0 .05 , 2.0] 

Elites 64 

Table 3: Optimization and planning hyperparameters, shared across CLAW and all baselines. 

13 B.2 EXPERIMENTS 1 AND 2: E NVIRONMENT FAMILIES AND PRETRAINING                                    

> Family dim( s)dim( a)Episode length Envs. (train) Pretraining steps Eval. freq. Prefill steps/env. Walker 24 61000 20 350,000 50,000 3,000 Reach 39 4100 650,000 10,000 1,000 Push 39 4100 6300,000 25,000 3,000 Cheetah 17 61000 2500,000 50,000 3,000

Table 4: Per-family pretraining setup for Experiments 1 and 2, which adapt the same check-points. All methods (CLAW, DR, ST, oracle) pretrain for the same number of steps per fam-ily with 5 seeds each. The oracle baseline appends the ground-truth environment parameter to the state, increasing dim( s) by 1 (Walker actuator scale, Cheetah running direction) or 3 (Reach/Push goal position).         

> Method Adapts weights? Mechanism
> CLAW no (base frozen after pretraining) One hypernet forward pass per environment step. Generates rank-16 LoRA adapters. DR, ST yes one gradient step per environment step, on fresh rank-16 adapters Oracle no ground-truth environment parameter appended to the state

Table 5: Experiment 1 online adaptation protocol. Every method rolls out for 30,000 environ-ment steps per environment, with 5 seeds; Optimizer settings for DR/ST’s gradient step are in Table 3.            

> Parameter Value
> Context data 3 episodes, collected with πcon
> Offline gradient steps swept (DR, ST, oracle) {0,1,100 ,1000 ,10000 }
> CLAW adaptation 1 hypernetwork forward pass (no gradient steps) Evaluation episodes per environment 10 Seeds 5

Table 6: Experiment 2 offline adaptation protocol. All methods adapt on the same fixed context dataset, then freeze and evaluate. Pretraining is shared with Experiment 1 (Table 4). 

B.3 EXPERIMENTS 3–5: C HEETAH /W ALKER MODEL -C APACITY STUDIES 

Experiments 3, 4, and 5 all use the Cheetah/Walker family ( dim( s)=24 , padded for Cheetah; 

dim( a)=6 ; episode length 1000, 2 environments) and share an evaluation protocol: each method re-adapts before every planner call, evaluated over 10 episodes per environment with 5 seeds.                                                         

> Size Encoder features Dynamics features Critic/Policy/Reward features Ensemble LoRA rank Params. |θw|
> A256, 512 512, 512, 512 512, 512 516 4,960,618 B256, 128 384, 384, 128 384, 384 216 1,214,651 D192, 48 192, 192, 48 192, 192 216 325,467 E128, 32 128, 128, 32 128, 128 216 161,787 F64, 32 64, 64, 32 64, 64 2860,667 G32, 32 32, 32, 32 32, 32 2425,467 H16, 32 16, 16, 32 16, 16 2211,707 I8, 32 8, 8, 32 8, 8 215,787

Table 7: Experiment 3 model-size sweep. Size label C is unused. Params. column is the base world model parameter count |θw | (excludes hypernetwork parameters θh), matching the x-axis of Fig. 6. All other hyperparameters follow Tables 2 and 3. Sizes F–I additionally shrink LoRA rank, tied across all five adapted modules; FiLM and Concat baselines use the same feature widths with no rank. 

14 Method LoRA rank Adapter params % of world model Return CLAW 1 1,200 2.25% 547.8 ± 41.9 CLAW 2 2,400 4.50% 685.8 ± 35.7 CLAW 4 4,800 9.00% 721.5 ± 54.0 CLAW 8 9,600 17.99% 817.3 ± 35.6 CLAW 16 19,200 35.98% 814.2 ± 86.6 CLAW 32 38,400 71.97% 917.0 ± 67.9 FiLM — 1,280 2.40% 714.3 ± 44.3 Concat — — — 556.2 ± 64.2 

Table 8: Experiment 4 rank sweep. Backbone size is fixed at F (Table 7); rank is swept jointly across all world model parameters (5 seeds each) while all other hyperparameters stay fixed. Return is mean ± 95% CI across 5 seeds, matching Fig. 7.             

> Method Task(s) Steps Trainable CLAW (joint) Walker + Cheetah 500,000 (250,000/task) base and hypernetwork Post-hoc, pass 1 Walker only 250,000 base only (plain TD-MPC2, no hypernetwork) Post-hoc, pass 2 Cheetah only 250,000 hypernetwork only (base frozen)

Table 9: Experiment 5 post-hoc comparison, at size F (Table 7), rank 8, 5 seeds. CLAW’s checkpoints are reused from Experiment 3, evaluated on the Cheetah task only to match the post-hoc baseline’s single-task evaluation. Both methods see 250,000 steps of Cheetah data and 500,000 total training steps; the only remaining difference is joint vs. sequential training of the base model and hypernetwork. 

15 REFERENCES 

Ali Amin, Raichelle Aniceto, Ashwin Balakrishna, Kevin Black, Ken Conley, Grace Connors, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Jared DiCarlo, Danny Driess, Michael Equi, Adnan Esmail, Yunhao Fang, Chelsea Finn, Catherine Glossop, Thomas Godden, Ivan Goryachev, Lachy Groom, Hunter Hancock, Karol Hausman, Gashon Hussein, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Rowan Jen, Tim Jones, Ben Katz, Liyiming Ke, Chandra Kuchi, Marinda Lamb, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell, Yao Lu, Vishnu Mano, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Charvi Sharma, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Laura Smith, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Kyle Stachow-icz, Will Stoeckle, Alex Swerdlow, James Tanner, Marcel Torne, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Blake Williams, Sukwon Yoo, Lili Yu, Ury Zhilinsky, and Zhiyuan Zhou. π∗

> 0.6

:a VLA that learns from experience, 2025. Physical Intelligence Technical Report. Brandon Amos. Tutorial on amortized optimization. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning ,16(5):592–732, 2023. OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob McGrew, Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al. Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research , 39(1):3–20, 2020. Mido Assran, Adrien Bardes, David Fan, Quentin Garrido, Russell Howes, Mojtaba Komeili, Matthew Muckley, Ammar Rizvi, Claire Roberts, Koustuv Sinha, Artem Zholus, et al. V-JEPA 2: Self-supervised video models enable understanding, prediction and planning, 2025. Philip J Ball, Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. Efficient online reinforcement learn-ing with offline data. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 1577–1594. PMLR, 2023. Jacob Beck, Matthew Thomas Jackson, Risto Vuorio, and Shimon Whiteson. Hypernetworks in meta-reinforcement learning. In Conference on robot learning , pp. 1478–1487. PMLR, 2023. Michael Beukman, Devon Jarvis, Richard Klein, Steven James, and Benjamin Rosman. Dynamics generalisation in reinforcement learning via adaptive context-aware policies, 2023. Christian Bianchi, Siamak Yousefi, Alessio Sampieri, Andrea Roberti, Luca Rigazio, Fabio Galasso, and Luca Franco. Robotic policy adaptation via weight-space meta-learning, 2026. Rujikorn Charakorn, Edoardo Cetin, Yujin Tang, and Robert Tjarko Lange. Text-to-lora: Instant transformer adaption, 2025. Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin, Pieter Abbeel, Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling, 2021. Tong Chen, Hao Fang, Patrick Xia, Xiaodong Liu, Benjamin Van Durme, Luke Zettlemoyer, Jian-feng Gao, and Hao Cheng. Generative adapter: Contextualizing language models in parameters with a single forward pass, 2024. Alexander Davydov, Franck Djeumou, Marcus Greiff, Makoto Suminaka, Michael Thompson, John Subosits, and Thomas Lew. First, learn what you don’t know: Active information gathering for driving at the limits of handling, 2024. Michael Dennis, Natasha Jaques, Eugene Vinitsky, Alexandre Bayen, Stuart Russell, Andrew Critch, and Sergey Levine. Emergent complexity and zero-shot transfer via unsupervised environment design. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:13049–13061, 2020. Yan Duan, John Schulman, Xi Chen, Peter L. Bartlett, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Rl 2: Fast reinforcement learning via slow reinforcement learning, 2016. Chelsea Finn, Pieter Abbeel, and Sergey Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks, 2017. 16 David Ha and Jürgen Schmidhuber. World models, 2018. David Ha, Andrew Dai, and Quoc V. Le. Hypernetworks, 2017. Danijar Hafner, Timothy Lillicrap, Jimmy Ba, and Mohammad Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent imagination, 2019. Danijar Hafner, Jurgis Pasukonis, Jimmy Ba, and Timothy Lillicrap. Mastering diverse domains through world models, 2023. Nicklas Hansen, Hao Su, and Xiaolong Wang. Td-mpc2: Scalable, robust world models for contin-uous control, 2024. James Harrison, Apoorva Sharma, and Marco Pavone. Meta-learning priors for efficient online bayesian regression. In International Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics , pp. 318–337. Springer, 2018. Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021. Yizhou Huang, Kevin Xie, Homanga Bharadhwaj, and Florian Shkurti. Continual model-based reinforcement learning with hypernetworks, 2020. Stephen James, Michael Bloesch, and Andrew J. Davison. Task-embedded control networks for few-shot imitation learning, 2018. Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Jacob Menick, Jonathan Schwarz, Jack Rae, Si-mon Osindero, Yee Whye Teh, Tim Harley, and Razvan Pascanu. Multiplicative interactions and where to find them. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. Yunfan Jiang, Agrim Gupta, Zichen Zhang, Guanzhi Wang, Yongqiang Dou, Yanjun Chen, Li Fei-Fei, Anima Anandkumar, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. Vima: General robot manipulation with multimodal prompts, 2022. Josip Juki´ c, Martin Tutek, and Jan Šnajder. Context parametrization with compositional adapters, 2025. Moo Jin Kim, Yihuai Gao, Tsung-Yi Lin, Yen-Chen Lin, Yunhao Ge, Grace Lam, Percy Liang, Shuran Song, Ming-Yu Liu, Chelsea Finn, and Jinwei Gu. Cosmos policy: Fine-tuning video models for visuomotor control and planning, 2026. Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014. Ilya Kostrikov, Ashvin Nair, and Sergey Levine. Offline reinforcement learning with implicit q-learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.06169 , 2021. Ashish Kumar, Zipeng Fu, Deepak Pathak, and Jitendra Malik. Rma: Rapid motor adaptation for legged robots, 2021. JB Lanier, Kyungmin Kim, Armin Karamzade, Yifei Liu, Ankita Sinha, Kat He, Davide Corsi, and Roy Fox. Adapting world models with latent-state dynamics residuals, 2025. Michael Laskin, Luyu Wang, Junhyuk Oh, Emilio Parisotto, Stephen Spencer, Richie Steigerwald, DJ Strouse, Steven Hansen, Angelos Filos, Ethan Brooks, Maxime Gazeau, Himanshu Sahni, Satinder Singh, and Volodymyr Mnih. In-context reinforcement learning with algorithm distilla-tion, 2022. Joonho Lee, Jemin Hwangbo, Lorenz Wellhausen, Vladlen Koltun, and Marco Hutter. Learning quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain, 2020. Jacob Levy, Jason Gibson, Bogdan Vlahov, Erica Tevere, Evangelos Theodorou, David Fridovich-Keil, and Patrick Spieler. Meta-learning online dynamics model adaptation in off-road au-tonomous driving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16923 , 2025. 17 Jacob Levy, Tyler Westenbroek, Kevin Huang, Fernando Palafox, Patrick Yin, Shayegan Omid-shafiei, Dong-Ki Kim, Abhishek Gupta, and David Fridovich-Keil. Simulation distillation: Pre-training world models in simulation for rapid real-world adaptation, 2026. Min Liu, Deepak Pathak, and Ananye Agarwal. Locoformer: Generalist locomotion via long-context adaptation, 2025. Yewei Liu, Xiyuan Wang, Yansheng Mao, Yoav Gelbery, Haggai Maron, and Muhan Zhang. Shine: A scalable in-context hypernetwork for mapping context to lora in a single pass, 2026. Lucas Maes, Quentin Le Lidec, Damien Scieur, Yann LeCun, and Randall Balestriero. LeWorld-Model: Stable end-to-end joint-embedding predictive architecture from pixels, 2026. Rabeeh Karimi Mahabadi, Sebastian Ruder, Mostafa Dehghani, and James Henderson. Parameter-efficient multi-task fine-tuning for transformers via shared hypernetworks, 2021. Nikhil Mishra, Mostafa Rohaninejad, Xi Chen, and Pieter Abbeel. A simple neural attentive meta-learner, 2017. Anusha Nagabandi, Ignasi Clavera, Simin Liu, Ronald S Fearing, Pieter Abbeel, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Learning to adapt in dynamic, real-world environments through meta-reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.11347 , 2018. Jesus-German Ortiz-Barajas, Helena Gomez-Adorno, and Thamar Solorio. Hyperloader: Integrating hypernetwork-based lora and adapter layers into multi-task transformers for sequence labelling, 2024. Xue Bin Peng, Marcin Andrychowicz, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Sim-to-real transfer of robotic control with dynamics randomization, 2017. Ethan Perez, Florian Strub, Harm de Vries, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron Courville. Film: Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer, 2017. Samuel Pfrommer, Mathew Halm, and Michael Posa. Contactnets: Learning discontinuous contact dynamics with smooth, implicit representations, 2020. M. Przewi˛ e´ zlikowski, P. Przybysz, J. Tabor, M. Zi˛ eba, and P. Spurek. Hypermaml: Few-shot adap-tation of deep models with hypernetworks, 2022. Aniruddh Raghu, Maithra Raghu, Samy Bengio, and Oriol Vinyals. Rapid learning or feature reuse? towards understanding the effectiveness of maml, 2019. Kate Rakelly, Aurick Zhou, Deirdre Quillen, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Efficient off-policy meta-reinforcement learning via probabilistic context variables, 2019. Scott Reed, Konrad Zolna, Emilio Parisotto, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Alexander Novikov, Gabriel Barth-Maron, Mai Gimenez, Yury Sulsky, Jackie Kay, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Tom Eccles, Jake Bruce, Ali Razavi, Ashley Edwards, Nicolas Heess, Yutian Chen, Raia Hadsell, Oriol Vinyals, Mahyar Bordbar, and Nando de Freitas. A generalist agent, 2022. Sahand Rezaei-Shoshtari, Charlotte Morissette, Francois Robert Hogan, Gregory Dudek, and David Meger. Hypernetworks for zero-shot transfer in reinforcement learning, 2022. Laura Smith, J. Chase Kew, Xue Bin Peng, Sehoon Ha, Jie Tan, and Sergey Levine. Legged robots that keep on learning: Fine-tuning locomotion policies in the real world. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 1593–1599. IEEE, 2022a. Laura Smith, Ilya Kostrikov, and Sergey Levine. A walk in the park: Learning to walk in 20 minutes with model-free reinforcement learning, 2022b. Yuval Tassa, Yotam Doron, Alistair Muldal, Tom Erez, Yazhe Li, Diego de Las Casas, David Bud-den, Abbas Abdolmaleki, Josh Merel, Andrew Lefrancq, Timothy Lillicrap, and Martin Ried-miller. Deepmind control suite, 2018. 18 Josh Tobin, Rachel Fong, Alex Ray, Jonas Schneider, Wojciech Zaremba, and Pieter Abbeel. Do-main randomization for transferring deep neural networks from simulation to the real world. In 

2017 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS) , pp. 23–30. IEEE, 2017. Johannes Von Oswald, Christian Henning, Benjamin F Grewe, and João Sacramento. Continual learning with hypernetworks. In 8th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2020)(virtual) . International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020. Yiqi Wang, Mrinal Verghese, and Jeff Schneider. Latent policy steering with embodiment-agnostic pretrained world models, 2025. Grady Williams, Andrew Aldrich, and Evangelos Theodorou. Model predictive path integral control using covariance variable importance sampling, 2015. Zhou Xian, Shamit Lal, Hsiao-Yu Tung, Emmanouil Antonios Platanios, and Katerina Fragkiadaki. Hyperdynamics: Meta-learning object and agent dynamics with hypernetworks, 2021. Jie Xu, Eric Heiden, Iretiayo Akinola, Dieter Fox, Miles Macklin, and Yashraj Narang. Neural robot dynamics, 2025. Qinyuan Ye and Xiang Ren. Learning to generate task-specific adapters from task description, 2021. Patrick Yin, Tyler Westenbroek, Simran Bagaria, Kevin Huang, Ching-An Cheng, Andrey Kobolov, and Abhishek Gupta. Rapidly adapting policies to the real world via simulation-guided fine-tuning, 2025. Tianhe Yu, Deirdre Quillen, Zhanpeng He, Ryan Julian, Karol Hausman, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Meta-world: A benchmark and evaluation for multi-task and meta reinforcement learning. In Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , 2019. Wenhao Yu, Jie Tan, C. Karen Liu, and Greg Turk. Preparing for the unknown: Learning a universal policy with online system identification, 2017. Xilun Zhang, Shiqi Liu, Peide Huang, William Jongwon Han, Yiqi Lyu, Mengdi Xu, and Ding Zhao. Dynamics as prompts: In-context learning for sim-to-real system identifications, 2024. Luisa Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Maximilian Igl, Sebastian Schulze, Yarin Gal, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon Whiteson. Varibad: A very good method for bayes-adaptive deep rl via meta-learning, 2019. Luisa M Zintgraf, Kyriacos Shiarlis, Vitaly Kurin, Katja Hofmann, and Shimon Whiteson. Fast context adaptation via meta-learning, 2018. 19