Title: Latent Cluster Analysis for Vision-Language-Action Models

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.02634v1

Published Time: Thu, 03 Sep 2026 01:27:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Latent Cluster Analysis for Vision-Language-Action Models 

Theodor Wulff 1,* , Sergio Lanza 2,* , Tamara Bila 3,* ,Angelo Cangelosi 1, Stefan Wermter 2, Igor Farkas 3

> 1

The University of Manchester, 2Universität Hamburg, 3Comenius University Bratislava  

> Correspondence: theodor.wulff@manchester.ac.uk, sergio.lanza@uni-hamburg.de, tamara.bila@fmph.uniba.sk *equal contribution

Abstract 

Vision-Language-Action (VLA) Models are in-creasingly used in robotics for their ability to ground language and perception into action, yet the internal representations driving their be-haviour remain poorly understood. We propose LAVLA, a framework for latent cluster analysis of VLA models, and conduct a layer-wise study of the state-of-the-art GR00T N1.5 model, with particular focus on its action decoder. To better characterise the latent space during action dif-fusion, we introduce a cross-attention-based embedding-weighting method that amplifies relevant features while suppressing less infor-mative ones. Quantitative evaluation shows that weighted clustering consistently outperforms the baseline. To improve interpretability, we extract human-interpretable concepts for each cluster, linking latent representations to seman-tic descriptions. Our analysis shows that latent clusters progressively disentangle spatiotem-poral and kinematic features, with represen-tations becoming more refined in the middle layers and stabilising toward the output. As such, LAVLA advances the interpretability of language-driven robotic systems. 

1 Introduction 

Vision-Language-Action Models (VLAs) are gain-ing popularity in robotic research due to their promising generalisation capabilities. Convention-ally, VLAs are trained on large-scale collections of robot data across several environments, tasks, and embodiments, enabling strong performance in different scenarios and architectures (Kim et al., 2025; NVIDIA et al., 2025). While performance continues to improve as the number of environ-ments and considered tasks increases, only a lim-ited amount of research is concerned with explain-ing the inner reasoning of these models (Häon et al., 2025). Extending the understanding of these models is a key factor in robotics, where the range of possible out-of-distribution scenarios is vast, and unverified behaviour can have dire con-sequences. Gaining insight into how models en-code multimodal information improves user trust and facilitates the identification of reasoning fail-ures (Ma et al., 2025; Zang et al., 2025). Based on these premises, we introduce a novel framework for Latent Cluster Analysis for Vision-Language-

Action Models, abbreviated LAVLA . We investi-gate the latent space of a Vision-Language-Action Model, focusing on the action decoder and cluster-ing embeddings in these layers. Specifically, we collect model embeddings during forward passes from the two main modules of the VLA: the final layer of the Vision-Language Model (VLM) back-bone and all intermediate cross-attention layers of the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) (Peebles and Xie, 2023) action decoder. Furthermore, we introduce an embedding-weighting module to amplify the fea-tures of important visuolinguistic tokens from the corresponding VLM backbone embeddings used in the cross-attention layers of the action decoder. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the LAVLA framework by applying it to NVIDIA’s GR00T N1.5 model (NVIDIA et al., 2025) using a subset of its original training data (O’Neill et al., 2024). Finally, we extract a human-interpretable concept from the resulting clusters based on the top-n clos-est samples to each centroid, assisted by an external VLM. Our results underscore the pivotal role of the embedding-weighting module in guiding the action denoising process. Our contributions can be summarised as follows: • We propose LAVLA, a novel cluster-based framework for analysing the embeddings in VLAs and demonstrate its effectiveness by analysing the latent space of the NVIDIA GR00T N1.5 model. • We introduce a cross-attention-based weight-ing module designed to amplify the influence of tokens prioritised by the action decoder. 1arXiv:2609.02634v1 [cs.RO] 2 Sep 2026 Concept generation  Concept:           

> Picking the fruit
> “Pick up …” “Grab the …” “Pick up …” “Grab the …”
> Evaluator
> CLIP-VIT
> Clustering All layers ( VLM +DiT )Only DiT layers
> cross-attention
> product
> Embedding Collection
> Video
> Language Instruction
> “Move the …”
> Visual-Language Module (VLM)
> Layer 0

· ·   

> Diffusion Transformer Module (DiT)
> Layer 11 Layer 0 Layer 14 Layer 6

· · · · · · 

· ·  · ·  · · Layer 6 

> Cluster-representative Samples
> Explainer
> VLM
> LLaVA-72B
> Cross-attention-weighted Clustering
> Cross-Attention Layers

VLA 

GR00T 

N1.5 

> Embeddings

Figure 1: Overview of our framework. We collect embeddings (coloured bars) from the last VLM backbone layer and the DiT action decoder. After the collection, we compute two different cluster typologies: baseline clustering applied to all embeddings from each layer; our embedding-weighting module steers the VLM backbone tokens according to their influence in the cross-attention layers. Finally, we generate concepts based on the top-n nearest samples for each cluster and evaluate each of them with CLIP. 

This technique performs consistent improve-ments across unsupervised clustering bench-marks; specifically, we observe a 62.1% in-crease in Silhouette scores and an 8% im-provement in the Davies-Bouldin (DB) Index. • We include a concept extraction pipeline that assigns a human-interpretable concept to each cluster, derived from the top-n nearest sam-ples to the cluster centroid, labelled using an external VLM and evaluated using CLIP. • Our analysis reveals that cross-attention layers consistently focus on specific tokens from the VLM backbone representations across differ-ent diffusion timesteps. The resulting clusters exhibit a clear disentanglement of spatiotem-poral and kinematic features, suggesting that the cross-attention mechanism effectively in-corporates the visuolinguistic context in the action diffusion process. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Vision-Language-Action Models 

Recent works on Vision Language Action Mod-els (Kim et al., 2025; Ghosh et al., 2024; Black et al., 2025; Belkhale et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2025; NVIDIA et al., 2025) aim to create universal mod-els capable of generating robot actions or trajec-tories across different embodiments. The train-ing paradigms often follow those of recent LLMs: large datasets are collected that span a wide range of trajectories and scenarios to enable generali-sation (O’Neill et al., 2024). Commonly, VLAs map language instructions and a visual observa-tion to robotic actions. Generally, the visual input is first processed into vision token embeddings, which are then concatenated with the embedded language tokens and fed into the Large Language Model (LLM) backbone. The backbone LLM then produces tokens directly, which map to specific robotic actions (Kim et al., 2025; Belkhale et al., 2024), or returns the embeddings of intermediate 2to final layers, which are then further processed by specific action decoder heads. These action decoder heads utilise different strategies to gener-ate multi-dimensional continuous actions, includ-ing flow matching (NVIDIA et al., 2025; Black et al., 2025; Shi et al., 2025) and diffusion decod-ing strategies (Ghosh et al., 2024), or simple linear transformations (Belkhale et al., 2024). Finally, to generalise to long-horizon tasks, some methods explicitly model hierarchical sub-tasks (Belkhale et al., 2024; Shi et al., 2025). Closest to our ap-proach, Häon et al. (2025) use clustering of FFN activations projected into token space to identify semantically meaningful directions for steering VLA behaviour. However, their clustering does not probe the action decoder. We close this re-search gap by specifically investigating the action decoding process. 

2.2 Latent Analysis in Foundation Models 

Latent analysis methods reduce high-dimensional embeddings into more compact representations that are generally more interpretable than the origi-nal embedding, allowing them to be linked with human-interpretable concepts. Sparse AutoEn-coders (SAEs) are prominent approaches (Huben et al., 2024) that integrate an autoencoder into a layer of a pretrained model. SAEs contain a single hidden layer trained to maintain sparse neuron ac-tivations for each reconstructed token. According to the superposition theory (Elhage et al., 2022), these new neurons encode the most salient informa-tion needed to rebuild the original embedding. Al-though SAEs have typically been applied to LLMs, some researchers have also extended their usage to VLAs and VLMs (Grant et al., 2026; Zhang et al., 2025; Pach et al., 2025). However, SAEs require large amounts of training data, making them slow to adapt to the fast pace of robotics development. A different line of research relies on clustering tech-niques to group similar embeddings. Unlike SAEs, clustering does not require large amounts of train-ing data, making it more suitable for robotic tasks. Fel et al. (2023) introduced a unifying theoretical framework that reframes concept extraction as a form of dictionary learning, while Hawasly et al. (2024) evaluated the quality of discovered concepts to compare clustering algorithms. 

3 Methodology 

A visual overview of the LAVLA framework is presented in Fig. 1. The first step in the LAVLA process is to collect the embeddings of selected layers during forward passes of a VLA. These em-beddings are then clustered layer-wise using an unsupervised clustering algorithm. Optionally, a cross-attention-based embedding-weighting mod-ule and a PCA-based dimensionality reduction can be applied before the clustering; when both are utilised, embedding-weighting precedes dimension-ality reduction. Finally, for each cluster, we select the top-n representative samples, generate a con-cept label using an external VLM, and evaluate it using CLIPSIM (Liu et al., 2024b). 

3.1 Embedding Collection 

Our investigation of the inner workings of VLAs fo-cuses on NVIDIA’s GR00T N1.5 model (NVIDIA et al., 2025), a state-of-the-art, 3B parameter VLA. GR00T N1.5 consists of an Eagle VLM (Li et al., 2025) backbone to process vision and language in-puts into multimodal representations and an action decoder head, which produces the actual output command. The action decoder head is a diffusion transformer module that alternates between self-attention and cross-attention blocks, which denoise trajectories into continuous action vectors. The action decoder head receives noisy action tokens and the encoded robot state as input, while the fused vision-language embeddings from the Eagle backbone are exclusively integrated in the cross-attention layers. For each sample in our data se-lection, we collect the embeddings resulting from each cross-attention layer in the action decoder head of GR00T N1.5 as well as the 12th layer of the Eagle backbone, the last VLM layer before visuolingual embeddings are passed to the action decoder. The action decoder performs four itera-tive denoising steps; consequently, each layer is traversed four times to progressively refine the ini-tially noisy action tokens. We store the embeddings of the action decoder with respect to the corre-sponding diffusion timestep. We use a part of the Open-X-Embodiment dataset 1 for our experiments. More details on the data preparation can be found in Appendix A.      

> 1The data is publicly available at: https://huggingface.co/datasets/NVIDIA/PhysicalAI-Robotics-GR00T-X-Embodiment-Sim

33.2 Clustering 

Once the embeddings have been collected, we cluster the embeddings of all cross-attention lay-ers of the diffusion transformer action decoder head and the last layer of the GR00T Vision-Language-Action Model using a hierarchical clus-tering method. Specifically, we use agglomera-tive hierarchical clustering. Initially, we explored DBSCAN and k-means but ultimately selected ag-glomerative clustering based on its superior early-stage performance. The algorithm initialises by assigning each sample to its own cluster, then re-cursively merges the closest clusters based on a predefined distance threshold and linkage method. This process continues until either no more merges are possible or an alternate stopping criterion is sat-isfied. We perform agglomerative clustering until no further merges are possible. 

3.2.1 Cross-Attention-Based Embedding-Weighting 

Early in the action denoising process of the VLA diffusion head, the embeddings contain mostly noise. Only in the later layers and after several diffusion steps, the model generates the final out-put from a more defined latent space. In the case of the GR00T model, cross-attention layers are used during the denoising process, which incorporate the visuolingual outputs of the backbone VLM at each timestep. We want to measure the focus allocated to each visuolingual source token SV L during the forward pass in GR00T’s action diffusion head, to gain insight into what matters to the cross-attention layer at a specific time and reduce the impact of less impactful tokens. This also eliminates the distur-bance of the clustering due to a noisy latent space early in the denoising process. We extract the attention weight matrix α directly from the cross-attention layers. This matrix has dimensions a × n, with a referring to the length of the action token sequence and n referring to the length of the visuolanguage token sequence. In the case of cross-attention in GR00T’s action decoder, the query matrix QA originates from encoding the previous self-attention layer, while the key matrix 

KV L is projected from the injected vision-language backbone embeddings. Following standard prac-tice in scaled dot-product attention, the scores are scaled by the factor √dk to mitigate softmax satu-ration. 

αa×n = softmax 

 QAKTV L √dk



(1) We average the weights in α for each source token 

j across all target tokens i to receive a vector of im-pact scores M = [ m1, . . . , m n], with mj defined as: 

mj = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

αij (2) Next, we reduce across all heads in multi-head attention by using the mean before applying the normalisation. We receive the normalised weight per source token by applying the softmax function to the vector of impact scores M . This results in the normalised weight vector W = [ w1, . . . , w n],with: 

wj = exp( mj )

Pnk=1 exp( mk) (3) Finally, we apply the Hadamard product ⊙ between the normalised weight vector W and the visuolin-gual tokens S′ 

> V L

= SV L ⊙ W . This reduces the impact of less influential tokens while boosting the more important ones in the resulting weighted vision-language token sequence S′

> V L

. The em-beddings S′ 

> V L

are specific to each cross-attention layer and diffusion timestep, allowing us to analyse the importance of tokens in the backbone vision-language sequence during the action denoising pro-cess. 

3.2.2 Cluster Evaluation 

To evaluate layer-wise cluster quality, we assess the spatial density and separation of the identified clus-ters using three standard metrics: the Silhouette Co-efficient (Rousseeuw, 1987), the Cali´ nski-Harabasz (CH) Index (Cali´ nski and Harabasz, 1974), and the Davies-Bouldin (DB) Index (Davies and Bouldin, 1979). These metrics are applied across all layers of interest as defined in Section 3.1. Higher CH Index, lower DB Index, and higher Silhouette score indicate better separation of clusters. To further investigate the flow of individual sam-ples through the network, we calculate the Over-lap Coefficient (OC) (Verma and Aggarwal, 2020) and Jaccard Index (Verma and Aggarwal, 2020) between all possible pairs of clusters A and B.See Appendix C for the exact formulations. The Overlap Coefficient highlights containment of the smaller set within the larger, and reaches its max-imum value of 1 when the smaller set is perfectly contained within the larger set. On the other hand, the Jaccard index balances the amount of shared elements and elements only contained in one of the two sets. The maximum value of 1 is only reached 4if both sets are identical. To compare cluster as-signments of different experiments and layers, we perform an additional alignment step as detailed in Appendix B. 

3.3 Concept Generation 

After completing the cluster computation, we gen-erate a representative concept for each cluster. Based on prior work (Zhang et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2024b), we select the top-n cluster samples near-est to the centroid and query a VLM to identify the human-interpretable pattern shared across them. Each sample consists of two elements: the textual command and the action video, which is decom-posed into a sequence of frames, 10 total frames for a 5-second clip. The VLM is then prompted to generate a short sentence that summarises each sample separately. These resulting sentences are further passed together to the VLM a second time to synthesise a single concept label for the cluster. Finally, we evaluate the overall performance using the CLIPSIM metric (Liu et al., 2024b), computed as the CLIP similarity between the final concept and the single frames of each cluster sample. 

4 Experiment Setup 

Embeddings for our analysis were collected on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU using a fully frozen GR00T N1.5 model. We collect 1,000 embeddings per task from the 24 tasks in the dataset in ca. 4 hours. Consecutive samples of the same task and episode in the resulting 24,000 embeddings are offset by 10 frames. We cluster the embeddings using agglomerative clustering with Euclidean dis-tance as metric and average linkage. The latent representations change between individual layers, hence there is no one-size-fits-all distance measure for all layers. We notice, however, that it yields the best results within certain ranges within the same components. We present an exhaustive list of hyperparameters in Appendix F. For the concept generation part, we adopt LLaVA 72B (Liu et al., 2024a) as the generator, and set top-n=5 due to computational constraints. For the same reason, we limited our analysis to the 10 most populous clusters for each layer/cluster technique pair. This threshold is specific to non-PCA-cluster methods, since these techniques create, on average, 7 clus-ters, as shown in Table 1. The concept generation pipeline was run on two NVIDIA A100 GPUs for ca. 3 hours. 

5 Results 

To evaluate the effectiveness of the LAVLA frame-work and investigate the latent space of the GR00T action decoding process, we investigate how clus-ters evolve during the diffusion forward passes, highlight patterns visible in the cluster contents, and present quantitative metrics on the effective-ness of different LAVLA configurations. We present our results across individual layers. Cross-attention layer weights are reused during the 4-step diffusion process (beginning with step 0, ending at step 3). Accordingly, we further differentiate embeddings from cross-attention layers by their diffusion timestep t, i.e. the cross-attention layer 2 with t=1 and cross-attention layer 2 with t=3 use the same weights, but the embeddings have been extracted at diffusion timestep t=1 and t=3 respec-tively. Results referencing the embeddings of the backbone layer are annotated as "BB", while we provide the layer index (starting at 0) to differen-tiate cross-attention layers (for example, see the y-axis of Figure 2a). 

5.1 Clustering Results Cross-attention-based embedding-weighting leads to measurable gains in clustering perfor-mance. We compare the general performance of different LAVLA configurations using common unsupervised cluster-evaluation metrics, and display the detailed metrics in Table 1. Adding the embedding-weighting mechanism has an overall positive effect, especially in the case of unreduced embeddings. It improves the Silhouette scores by 62.1% in the scenario without PCA and by 24.0% in the scenario with PCA. DB Index scores improve in each scenario by ca. 8%. This is likely due to the embedding-weighting mechanism not relying on noisy action tokens but rather on differently amplified backbone embeddings, which bear semantic meaning over the full process. While the action token embeddings start as noise, they only become semantically informative towards the end of the diffusion process. CH Index scores only improve in the case in which PCA is also applied. This is likely a result of the extremely high number of clusters in the unweighted case, which leads to dense clusters with only a single sample, inflating the resulting score. Based on these results, we hypothesise that the embedding-weighting mechanism would also positively impact other interpretability frameworks 5Table 1: Clustering performance across configurations                                                     

> LAVLA Silhouette Score ↑DB Index ↓CH Index ↑N clusters
> Baseline 0.0837 ±0.05 1.4734 ±0.18 402.12 ±358.6 15703.8 ±10282.3 w/ weighted 0.1357 ±0.03 1.3617 ±0.27 56.41 ±21.08 3835.2 ±3479.0 w/ PCA 0.1324 ±0.06 1.5858 ±0.24 1063.9 ±481.4 25.93 ±72.1 w/ PCA w/ weighted 0.1642 ±0.06 1.4682 ±0.15 1651.0 ±775.8 7.1515 ±2.41
> (a) Baseline clusters through layers
> (b) Weighted Clustering clusters through layers
> (c) PCA Clustering clusters through layers
> (d) Weighted PCA Clustering clusters through layers

Figure 2: Heatmaps of cluster sizes across different layers and LAVLA configurations. 

that investigate model latent spaces, e.g., SAEs, and suggest their inclusion in future work. 

Latent representations exhibit increased structural coherence at deeper architectural lay-ers and later diffusion timesteps. The unreduced latent embeddings of the GR00T model are repre-sented as a (n × d) matrix, with n referring to the sequence length of the vision and language input tokens, and d being the internal dimension of the 

Figure 3: Mean number of clusters over diffusion timesteps 

per-token embeddings. The vision-language token sequence length varies slightly with the number of tokens in the language instruction; the number of extracted vision tokens remains constant. Averag-ing across the sequence length results in a set of 

d-dimensional embedding vectors that may have been amplified by the embedding-weighting pro-cess depending on the experiment configuration. Influenced by the curse of dimensionality (Beyer et al., 1999), applying agglomerative clustering on these high-dimensional sets of embedding vectors results in a large number of clusters, with only a few select clusters containing more than a few samples. This is highlighted by the heatmaps in Figures 2a to 2d which display the largest 100 clusters over layers and diffusion timesteps. As shown in Figure 3, the latent representations become increasingly structured as the diffusion pro-cess nears completion. This progression toward a more organised state leads to a lower cluster count, suggesting that disparate embeddings are being consolidated into cohesive groups. Apply-ing PCA for dimensionality reduction reduces the embedding dimension to 100 per embedding. Con-sequently, the overall number of extracted clusters drops significantly. We observe the same trend as with the uncompressed embeddings, where the number of clusters becomes lower towards later dif-fusion timesteps. A visual inspection of the latent space under PCA visualisations reveals the same 6organising pattern in Appendix E. However, this same trend is less prominent when incorporating the embedding-weighting mecha-nism. This likely stems from the weighted back-bone embeddings being directed towards certain clusters during the cross-attention mechanism throughout the whole process. In the absence of this weighting mechanism, the noisy action embed-dings require additional denoising iterations before the action decoder layers can resolve the latent space into a structured state. The UMAP visualisa-tions in Appendix D further highlight the effect of the weighting mechanism. 

5.2 Cluster Consistency    

> (a) Weighted Jaccard (b) Weighted OC
> (c) PCA Jaccard (d) PCA OC
> (e) Weighted + PCA Jaccard (f) Weighted + PCA OC
> Figure 4: Layer-wise cluster overlap matrices for differ-ent LAVLA configurations.

Cluster assignments are stable across diffu-sion timesteps within the same layer. To investi-gate whether the cluster assignments remain consis-tent across different layers, we computed the pair-wise Jaccard and Overlap Coefficient metrics of the largest 100 clusters between layers and diffusion steps. The results are displayed in the heatmaps in Figures 4b to 4f. We did not include the heatmaps for the case without either PCA or the embedding-weighting mechanism, as the cluster algorithm was unable to find meaningful assignments during early diffusion timesteps (see Figure 3) and assigns each sample to its own cluster. As a result, this inflates the corresponding metrics in the early layers. The heatmaps 4c and 4d reveal mainly two things: first, cluster assignments stay more consistent closer to the final outputs. This is largely a consequence of the diffusion process, which leads to less noisy embeddings over time, and the model having to decide on a much smaller number of possible ac-tion vectors compared to the vast possibilities of language-vision-state inputs. Second, the repeat-ing patterns in the heatmaps suggest that cluster assignments between the same layer but different diffusion timesteps remain consistent. They are especially highlighted by the diagonal lines visi-ble in Figures 4b, 4e, and 4f. We hypothesise that this is due to the model using different layers to pay special attention to certain features in the back-bone embeddings. E.g., one layer might consider colour representations more important while an-other might specifically incorporate object-centric features. Figures 4c and 4d further illustrate how the latent space becomes more ordered towards the end of the diffusion process, likely resulting in more consistent clusters (see patterns in bot-tom right corner). Our LAVLA framework cannot reveal which features precisely are important for different layers, and as such we leave this investi-gation for future work on VLAs. 

5.3 Latent Space Organisation Clusters exhibit distinct temporal characteris-tics. As shown in Figures 5a and 6a, the latent space of the action diffusion head exhibits higher temporal separability than the VLM backbone. Be-sides a visible increase in separability between clus-ters, this observation is supported by the increased mean within the displayed 10 largest clusters. This suggests that the model discriminates between gen-eralisable states commonly encountered at specific intervals within different episodes, implying spa-tiotemporal awareness. Furthermore, even if this generalisation were driven solely by visual features common to specific episode timesteps, it would nonetheless indicate that the model has developed a structured spatial representation of the task envi-ronment. Further experiments are required to fully comprehend the temporal understanding capabili-ties of the model. 7(a) Timesteps (b) Left arm displacement (c) Waist displacement (d) Right arm displacement 

Figure 5: Wasserstein distances between feature distributions of top clusters within VL backbone    

> (a) Timesteps (b) Left arm displacement (c) Waist displacement (d) Right arm displacement

Figure 6: Wasserstein distances between feature distributions of top clusters of cross-attention layer 14 at final diffusion timestep (t=3). Table 2: Mean ± std CLIPSIM ↑ (video vs. concept) per configuration and layer.                                                                  

> Layer Backbone L11 CA0 CA6 CA12 CA14 unweighted 0.214 ±0.014 0.229 ±0.009 0.228 ±0.011 0.226 ±0.014 0.218 ±0.016 weighted 0.214 ±0.014 0.225 ±0.016 0.216 ±0.015 0.206 ±0.019 0.213 ±0.024 pca 0.219 ±0.013 0.223 ±0.015 0.233 ±0.018 0.233 ±0.022 0.221 ±0.020 weighted_pca 0.219 ±0.013 0.223 ±0.015 0.209 ±0.024 0.225 ±0.010 0.221 ±0.014

Clusters separate body part usage. The plots in Figures 5b to 5d, and 6b to 6d reveal the same trend with a ca. 20% increase in mean intra-cluster Wasserstein distance for the arm joints observed in Figures 5b and 6b for the left arm, and Figures 5d and 6d for the right arm. While less prominent, it can still be observed in the waist embeddings in Figures 5c and 6c. 

5.4 Concept Generation Results 

Table 2 reports CLIPSIM results across the four main configurations. PCA-based and weighted variants tend to yield slightly more faithful con-cepts, with PCA consistently improving perfor-mance across layers. However, CLIPSIM scores should be interpreted with caution: robotic manipu-lation datasets typically exhibit low visual diversity and the input clips are short, which likely imposes a ceiling on achievable performance regardless of the clustering method. For the same reason, the final concepts identified are semantically close to each other, mostly involving picking objects and returning them into a container. Nevertheless, we believe that since the DiT is a denoising process, the concepts may persist or evolve across layers rather than remain fixed, while still focusing on the same macro task. This experiment demonstrates the feasibility of concept construction, though con-cept quality remains a limitation to address in fu-ture work. We present some generated concept examples in Appendix H. 

6 Conclusion 

We present LAVLA, a framework for analysing the latent spaces of Vision-Language-Action (VLA) Models through clustering. By amplifying the tokens prioritised during cross-attention, LAVLA elucidates the connection between backbone fea-ture extraction and the iterative denoising process of the action decoder. Through comparative ex-periments, we demonstrate that our embedding-weighting mechanism significantly enhances rep-8resentational clarity. Our results indicate that task-specific representations are distributed across dis-tinct cross-attention layers and maintain high spa-tiotemporal consistency across the diffusion trajec-tory. By making VLA latent spaces more trans-parent, LAVLA moves us closer to trustworthy, language-driven robotic systems. 

Ethical Considerations 

The presented work aims at improving the under-standing of the inner workings of VLAs. The LAVLA framework poses no inherent risk to as-pects such as data privacy, as models and data used in this work are publicly available. Investigating the latent space of pretrained models also does not introduce risks regarding inclusivity and biases, but helps in detecting these. Deploying VLAs in real-world scenarios on a variety of embodiments could lead to catastrophic consequences if the model is not tested and thoroughly understood. With in-creased understanding of the VLA latent space, LAVLA improves the safety of VLAs. 

Limitations 

Our experiments are limited to a single dataset and model; results may not generalise to other datasets or architectures, which we leave for future work. Concept generation and its unsupervised seman-tic verification remain challenging without ground-truth annotations, and since concepts are derived from static images, temporal or dynamic aspects of scenes are more difficult to capture. Our analysis is bounded by the VLA’s input horizon, which only covers short clips, so our findings may not extend to longer-horizon behaviours. Finally, our clustering analysis relies on agglomerative clustering, whose assumptions may not fully capture the structure of complex, non-spherical manifolds, potentially influencing the resulting concept groupings. 

References 

Suneel Belkhale, Tianli Ding, Ted Xiao, Pierre Ser-manet, Quan Vuong, Jonathan Tompson, Yevgen Chebotar, Debidatta Dwibedi, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2024. RT-H: Action Hierarchies using Language. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems ,Delft, Netherlands. RSS. Kevin Beyer, Jonathan Goldstein, Raghu Ramakrishnan, and Uri Shaft. 1999. When Is “Nearest Neighbor” Meaningful? In Database Theory — ICDT’99 , pages 217–235, Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer. Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Robert Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y. Galliker, Dibya Ghosh, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, brian ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, and 16 others. 2025. π0.5: aVision-Language-Action Model with Open-World Generalization. In 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning .T. Cali´ nski and J Harabasz. 1974. A dendrite method for cluster analysis. Communications in Statistics ,3(1):1–27. David L. Davies and Donald W. Bouldin. 1979. ACluster Separation Measure. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , PAMI-1(2):224–227. Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, Nicholas Schiefer, Tom Henighan, Shauna Kravec, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Robert Lasenby, Dawn Drain, Carol Chen, Roger Grosse, Sam McCandlish, Jared Kaplan, Dario Amodei, Martin Wattenberg, and Christopher Olah. 2022. Toy models of superposition. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652 , arXiv:2209.10652. Thomas Fel, Victor Boutin, Mazda Moayeri, Rémi Cadène, Louis Bethune, Léo Andéol, Mathieu Chalvi-dal, and Thomas Serre. 2023. A holistic approach to unifying automatic concept extraction and concept importance estimation. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , NIPS ’23, pages 54805–54818, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Dibya Ghosh, Homer Rich Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, Jianlan Luo, You Liang Tan, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Quan Vuong, Ted Xiao, Pannag R Sanketi, Dorsa Sadigh, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. 2024. Octo: An Open-Source Gen-eralist Robot Policy. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems , Delft, Netherlands. RSS. Bryce Grant, Xijia Zhao, and Peng Wang. 2026. Not All Features Are Created Equal: A Mechanistic Study of Vision-Language-Action Models. Preprint ,arXiv:2603.19233. Bear Häon, Kaylene Caswell Stocking, Ian Chuang, and Claire Tomlin. 2025. Mechanistic Interpretability for Steering Vision-Language-Action Models. In 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning .Majd Hawasly, Fahim Dalvi, and Nadir Durrani. 2024. Scaling up Discovery of Latent Concepts in Deep NLP Models. In Proceedings of the 18th Confer-ence of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,pages 793–806, St. Julian’s, Malta. Association for Computational Linguistics. 

9Robert Huben, Hoagy Cunningham, Logan Riggs Smith, Aidan Ewart, and Lee Sharkey. 2024. Sparse Autoen-coders Find Highly Interpretable Features in Lan-guage Models. In The Twelfth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , pages 7827–7845, Vienna, Austria. ICLR. Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan P Foster, Pannag R Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. 2025. OpenVLA: An Open-Source Vision-Language-Action Model. In Proceed-ings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , vol-ume 270 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-search , pages 2679–2713, Munich, Germany. PMLR. Harold W. Kuhn. 1955. The Hungarian method for the assignment problem. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly , 2(1-2):83–97. Zhiqi Li, Guo Chen, Shilong Liu, Shihao Wang, Vibashan VS, Yishen Ji, Shiyi Lan, Hao Zhang, Yilin Zhao, Subhashree Radhakrishnan, Nadine Chang, Karan Sapra, Amala Sanjay Deshmukh, Tuomas Rin-tamaki, Matthieu Le, Ilia Karmanov, Lukas Voeg-tle, Philipp Fischer, De-An Huang, and 8 others. 2025. Eagle 2: Building Post-Training Data Strate-gies from Scratch for Frontier Vision-Language Mod-els. arXiv:2501.14818 .Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Sheng Shen, and Yong Jae Lee. 2024a. Llava-next: Improved reasoning, ocr, and world knowledge. Yaofang Liu, Xiaodong Cun, Xuebo Liu, Xintao Wang, Yong Zhang, Haoxin Chen, Yang Liu, Tieyong Zeng, Raymond Chan, and Ying Shan. 2024b. EvalCrafter: Benchmarking and Evaluating Large Video Genera-tion Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 22139–22149. Pingchuan Ma, Lennart Rietdorf, Dmytro Kotovenko, Vincent Tao Hu, and Björn Ommer. 2025. Does VLM classification benefit from LLM description semantics? In Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-Seventh Conference on Innovative Applica-tions of Artificial Intelligence and Fifteenth Sym-posium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intel-ligence , AAAI’25/IAAI’25/EAAI’25, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, US. AAAI Press. Leland McInnes, John Healy, Nathaniel Saul, and Lukas Großberger. 2018. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Ap-proximation and Projection. Journal of Open Source Software , 3(29):861. NVIDIA, :, Johan Bjorck, Fernando Castañeda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da, Runyu Ding, Linxi "Jim" Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang, Joel Jang, Zhenyu Jiang, Jan Kautz, Kaushil Kundalia, Lawrence Lao, Zhiqi Li, Zongyu Lin, and 24 others. 2025. GR00T N1: An Open Foundation Model for Generalist Humanoid Robots. Preprint ,arXiv:2503.14734. Abby O’Neill, Abdul Rehman, Abhiram Maddukuri, Abhishek Gupta, Abhishek Padalkar, Abraham Lee, Acorn Pooley, Agrim Gupta, Ajay Mandlekar, Ajinkya Jain, Albert Tung, Alex Bewley, Alex Her-zog, Alex Irpan, Alexander Khazatsky, Anant Rai, Anchit Gupta, Andrew Wang, Anikait Singh, and 260 others. 2024. Open X-Embodiment: Robotic Learning Datasets and RT-X Models : Open X-Embodiment Collaboration. In 2024 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pages 6892–6903, Yokohama, Japan. IEEE. Mateusz Pach, Shyamgopal Karthik, Quentin Bouniot, Serge Belongie, and Zeynep Akata. 2025. Sparse autoencoders learn monosemantic Features in vision-language models. Poster on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) .William Peebles and Saining Xie. 2023. Scalable Diffusion Models with Transformers . In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 4172–4182, Los Alamitos, CA, USA. IEEE Computer Society. Peter J. Rousseeuw. 1987. Silhouettes: A graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis. 

Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics ,20:53–65. Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Brian Ichter, Michael Robert Equi, Liyiming Ke, Karl Pertsch, Quan Vuong, James Tan-ner, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Niccolo Fu-sai, Adrian Li-Bell, Danny Driess, Lachy Groom, Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. 2025. Hi Robot: Open-Ended Instruction Following with Hierarchical Vision-Language-Action Models. In Forty-Second International Conference on Machine Learning .Matthew Stephens. 2000. Dealing With Label Switch-ing in Mixture Models. Journal of the Royal Sta-tistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology ,62(4):795–809. Vijay Verma and Rajesh Kumar Aggarwal. 2020. Acomparative analysis of similarity measures akin to the Jaccard index in collaborative recommendations: Empirical and theoretical perspective. Social Net-work Analysis and Mining , 10(1):43. Yuan Zang, Tian Yun, Hao Tan, Trung Bui, and Chen Sun. 2025. Pre-trained Vision-Language Models Learn Discoverable Visual Concepts. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. Kaichen Zhang, Yifei Shen, Bo Li, and Ziwei Liu. 2025. Large Multi-modal Models Can Interpret Features in Large Multi-modal Models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 3650–3661, Honolulu, Hawaii, US. IEEE. 

10 A Data 

We collect embeddings from a part of the Open-X-Embodiment dataset featuring a GR1 robot per-forming humanoid robot tabletop manipulation. In total, we have 240k trajectories across 24 tasks at our disposal with visual observations from the ego perspective of the GR1 robot 2. Due to mem-ory constraints, we load 1000 samples per task, re-sulting in a final dataset of 24k observation-action pairs. These samples are used to collect embed-dings via the GR00T model. Each task of the orig-inal dataset contains 10,000 samples, distributed across episodes of varying lengths. To spread our selection evenly across different episodes we in-clude every 10th sample in our selection. Consistent with standard VLA architec-tures (NVIDIA et al., 2025; Kim et al., 2025), the observation consists of the current frame, the task instruction in natural language, and a robot state vector containing the current joint configuration. The ground-truth action is normally used for behaviour cloning during training of VLAs, and not required in our investigation. The state information contains the joint configuration of the hands, arms, neck, and waist joints. The tasks span a variety of tabletop manipulation tasks involving the picking up and placing down of different objects. We include all 24 tasks in our investigation. 

B Cluster Alignment 

The clusters are computed independently for each layer and diffusion timestep combination (if appli-cable). This results in clusters between layers possi-bly containing the same or similar samples but hav-ing different cluster identifiers assigned. This phe-nomenon is known as label switching (Stephens, 2000). To ensure consistent assignment of cluster identifiers, an additional alignment step is required. We resolve the label switching occurring between cluster assignments of different layers and diffusion timesteps by performing optimal bipartite matching with the Hungarian algorithm (Kuhn, 1955). By us-ing the degree of sample overlap between clusters to define the cost matrix, we can consistently trace the evolution of cluster memberships as data flows through the model. 

> 2Fourier GR-1 robot: https://www.fftai.com/products-gr1
> (a) UMAP of PCA compressed embeddings in layer 0 at diffusion timestep 0.
> (b) UMAP of weighted and PCA compressed em-beddings in layer 0 at diffusion timestep 0.
> (c) UMAP of embeddings from VLM backbone layer 12 (no diffusion timestep).
> (d) UMAP of PCA compressed embeddings in layer 14 at diffusion timestep 3.
> (e) UMAP of weighted and PCA compressed em-beddings in layer 14 at diffusion timestep 3.

Figure 7: Comparative UMAP visualisations of the la-tent space at different layers and diffusion timesteps using PCA-compressed embeddings without and with a weighting mechanism. 

11 (a) Layer 0, Timestep 0 (b) Layer 0, Timestep 1 (c) Layer 0, Timestep 2 (d) Layer 0, Timestep 3          

> (e) Layer 6, Timestep 0 (f) Layer 6, Timestep 1 (g) Layer 6, Timestep 2 (h) Layer 6, Timestep 3
> (i) Layer 14, Timestep 0 (j) Layer 14, Timestep 1 (k) Layer 14, Timestep 2 (l) Layer 14, Timestep 3
> (m) Layer 15, Timestep 0 (n) Layer 15, Timestep 1 (o) Layer 15, Timestep 2 (p) Layer 15, Timestep 3

Figure 8: Visualisation of the first two principal components of the latent space across layers (rows) and timesteps (columns). Each subplot shows the latent space structure for a specific layer–timestep combination, illustrating how latent representations evolve through the network. 

C Formulas 

The Overlap Coefficient O(A, B ) is computed as follows: 

O(A, B ) = 

(0 if min( |A|, |B|) = 0  

> |A∩B|
> min( |A|,|B|)

else 

(4) Whereas the Jaccard Index J(A, B ) is computed as displayed in equation 5: 

J(A, B ) = 

(0 if |A ∪ B| = 0  

> |A∩B||A∪B|

else (5) This gives us a quantifiable way of measuring how much the internal representations of the model change over different layers and diffusion steps. 

D Cluster Visualisation 

The embedding-weighting module uncovers structural patterns during the initial stages of the diffusion process. The UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018) visualisations in Figures 7a through 7e demonstrate how the weighting mechanism struc-tures the VLA latent space. This effect is particu-larly evident in the early layers, where the weighted embeddings form significantly more coherent clus-ters than their unweighted counterparts. The first cross-attention layer at the first diffusion timestep takes as input barely processed noisy action token representations, which leads to the unstructured, circular-shaped latent space in Figure 7a. In con-trast, the UMAP visualisation of the embeddings of the last layer of the VLM display a more or-dered latent space. As our embedding-weighting mechanism directly incorporates the influence of the VLM embeddings, we are able to improve the ordering of the latent space in early noisy embed-dings, based on the actual attention of the model. 

E PCA Analysis 

We investigate the principal components of GR00T’s internal representations across 10,000 samples from all tasks by visualising the first two principal components and investigating the ex-plained variance of individual components. Fig-12 Figure 9: First two principal components of vision-language features produced by VLM backbone. 

ure 9 visualises the first two principal components of the vision-language embeddings. The Scree plot (left) reveals that the first ten principal components seem to carry the highest amount of explained vari-ance. However, the plot of the explained cumu-lative variance (middle) barely exceeds 60% of explained variance. This suggests that individual components are responsible only for a small por-tion of the total information encoded by the sin-gle embedding. The visualisation of the first two components (right) provides some insight into the embedding space, which already provides some recognisable structures. As can be observed by the visualizations of the first two principal components of the VLA’s latent space in Figure 8, the noisy action tokens already show the first signs of clear separability within the first diffusion timestep (see Figure 8 (a),(e), and (i)). Within the same layer, stronger separation occurs over time, which is visible especially across layer 6 (see Figure 8 (e) - (h)) where a single noisy cluster splits over time into 5 visually distinct clusters. Ac-cordingly, the variance of the principal components increases over time. 

F Hyperparameters 

Table 3 contains the hyperparameters yielding the best results after sweeping over different distance threshold ranges. 

G Violin plots of top clusters 

The Wasserstein distances in Figures 5 and 6, pro-vide a quantitative comparison of the different dis-tributions of selected features in the top clusters. Figures 10 and 11 provide an additional visuali-sation of these clusters, highlighting the model’s latent space organisation at different layers in the model. 

H Concept generation examples 

Figures 12a and 12b show two example cluster sample sets used in the concept-generation process. 

Table 3: Exhaustive list of distance thresholds per layer.                                      

> Layer Distance Threshold LAVLA (baseline)
> VLM Backbone 9.0383 Cross-Attention 0 109.1253 Cross-Attention 2 109.9187 Cross-Attention 4 108.6459 Cross-Attention 6 103.7606 Cross-Attention 8 108.2924 Cross-Attention 10 90.0302 Cross-Attention 12 86.9423 Cross-Attention 14 85.0988
> LAVLA w/ weighted
> VLM Backbone 9.0383 Cross-Attention 0 2.6785 Cross-Attention 2 2.7405 Cross-Attention 4 2.9376 Cross-Attention 6 2.8599 Cross-Attention 8 3.6135 Cross-Attention 10 4.1296 Cross-Attention 12 2.8211 Cross-Attention 14 3.2981
> LAVLA w/ PCA
> VLM Backbone 79.9869 Cross-Attention 0 60.5738 Cross-Attention 2 60.9242 Cross-Attention 4 59.8374 Cross-Attention 6 61.5705 Cross-Attention 8 56.9619 Cross-Attention 10 59.1317 Cross-Attention 12 54.3040 Cross-Attention 14 47.7121
> LAVLA w/ PCA w/ weighted
> VLM Backbone 79.9869 Cross-Attention 0 61.3591 Cross-Attention 2 59.0093 Cross-Attention 4 56.0642 Cross-Attention 6 66.1785 Cross-Attention 8 59.5633 Cross-Attention 10 62.7542 Cross-Attention 12 65.4799 Cross-Attention 14 55.7679

Each concept is derived from 5 videos, each de-coded into 10 sequential frames and passed to the VLM (LLaVA-72B) alongside the corresponding task command, shown as the white caption below each image row. 13 (a) Timesteps 

> (b) Left arm displacement
> (c) Waist displacement
> (d) Right arm displacement

Figure 10: Violin plots of feature distributions of top clusters within VL backbone 

> (a) Timesteps
> (b) Left arm displacement
> (c) Waist displacement
> (d) Right arm displacement

Figure 11: Violin plots of feature distributions of top clusters of cross-attention layer 14 at final diffusion timestep (t=3). 

14 (a) Final concept: The robot’s hand picks up an object and places it into a container. 

(b) Final concept: The robot picks up an object from a surface and places it into a container. 

Figure 12: Examples of concept extraction for cross-attention layer 0 using both PCA and weighted clustering. 

15