Title: TacPAC: Tactile Prediction and Real-Time Action Correction in World-Action Models for Contact-Rich Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.05266v1

Published Time: Mon, 07 Sep 2026 01:19:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# TacPAC: Tactile Prediction and Real-Time Action Correction in World-Action Models for Contact-Rich Manipulation 

## Zipei Ma 1,2,3 , Xiaofei Wei 1,2 , Junzhe Jiang 1, Shunlin Lu 3, Li Zhang 1,2 

> 1

School of Data Science, Fudan University 2Shanghai Innovation Institute 3NeoteAI 

Abstract 

World-action models guide action generation with predicted future observations, but vision-centric predictions miss the lo-cal contact cues that decide contact-rich manipulation. How-ever, naively predicting future tactile observations as addi-tional views recovers only a third of the achievable gain in our experiments. This gap reflects a timing mismatch: predic-tions precede execution, while tactile feedback arrives during it. We introduce TacPAC, which turns tactile prediction into real-time action correction. Once the base model has planned an action chunk, TacPAC caches the predicted contact that plan was conditioned on together with the plan’s own rep-resentation, and a tactile expert reads each newly observed tactile image against that cache to correct the actions not yet executed. Feedback is thus interpreted against what the plan anticipated rather than in isolation, and one correction is a sin-gle pass over that cache, 20 .7× cheaper than regenerating the chunk. On five real-robot tasks spanning precision insertion, fragile-object handling, object reorientation, and long-horizon manipulation, TacPAC leads every task and raises the average from 22% for its vision-only base model to 64%. Code is avail-able at https://github.com/LogosRoboticsGroup/TacPAC. 

## 1 Introduction 

Contact-rich manipulation requires a robot to adjust its ac-tions from physical interaction, not only from visible scene geometry. Inserting a charger plug demands precise align-ment under constrained contact, and grasping a potato chip requires enough grip to lift it without breaking it. In both cases, images give essential global context but rarely resolve the local deformation, incipient slip, or small insertion mis-match that decides the outcome. Tactile sensing observes these interaction changes directly and has shown value for manipulation policies (George et al. 2025). Recent vision-language-action policies map multimodal context directly to action chunks (Brohan et al. 2023; Kim et al. 2024; Black et al. 2024; Physical Intelligence et al. 2025; Zhao et al. 2023; Yu et al. 2026; Wang et al. 2026; Yuan et al. 2026b; Wu et al. 2026; Zhang et al. 2026a; Team et al. 2026), whereas world-action models (WAMs) addition-ally predict future observations and let action tokens attend to them, providing a predictive prior over the consequences of an action (Yuan et al. 2026d; Li et al. 2026a,b; Ye et al. 2026; Kim et al. 2026; Ma et al. 2026; Zhang et al. 2026b). This prior, however, is typically dominated by visual observations. The resulting actions can remain unreliable when task suc-cess depends on contact changes that are weakly expressed or occluded in the image stream. A natural remedy is to make the WAM predict tactile ob-servations as well, treating tactile images as additional views generated together with future video (Lou et al. 2026; Zheng et al. 2026; Zang et al. 2026; Yuan et al. 2026c). In our experiments this extension does improve task success, but it captures only about a third of the gain that tactile sens-ing turns out to afford. One reason may be that informative tactile changes are temporally sparse, so a future-view ob-jective need not make action generation sensitive to the con-tact transitions that matter. More fundamentally, a prediction made before execution cannot revise actions that are already planned but not yet executed, so the key challenge is to con-nect predicted tactile interaction with the tactile evidence acquired during execution. We introduce TacPAC , which makes tactile prediction ac-tionable through real-time action correction (Fig. 1). In the base model, a video expert predicts future visual and tactile observations and an action expert attends to those predic-tions through mixture-of-transformers attention (Liang et al. 2025), so the planned action chunk is conditioned on the contact it is expected to produce. Once the chunk is planned, TacPAC caches that finished prediction and the plan itself as layer-wise attention states, and lets a tactile expert read each newly observed tactile image against the cache. The corrector therefore sees not only what is being sensed but what the plan assumed would be sensed, and outputs a per-step delta action for the steps not yet executed. Because the base model runs once per chunk while each correction is a single pass over the fixed cache, corrections keep up with the tactile stream instead of waiting for the next plan. We evaluate TacPAC on five real-robot tasks—charger-plug insertion, multi-object fruit transfer, fragile potato-chip transfer, empty-bottle uprighting, and expansion-card insertion—in which tight tolerances and regulated contact forces turn small errors into jamming, slip, or damage. The experiments answer four questions that mirror our claims: overall contact-rich capability (Q1), why tactile prediction alone is insufficient (Q2), which components enable tactile action correction (Q3), and whether the tactile expert is fast enough to correct a chunk in real time (Q4). TacPAC attains the highest success rate on all five tasks, improves the five-arXiv:2609.05266v1 [cs.RO] 4 Sep 2026 Tactile Expert Action Expert Video Expert   

> Shared Self Attention Tactile-Action KV cache
> Predict Future Visual & Tactile High-freq. Action Correction with Tactile Joint Action Generation
> Future Visual Future Tactile Language Prompt Input Visual Input Tactile Asynchronous Tactile Clean Action
> w/o Tactile Prediction w/o Tactile Correction Ours
> Asynchronous Tactile
> Predict

Compare 

> Correct Imagine

# TacPAC Model  

> (a) (b) (c)

42% 

> Ours Too Tight No Adjustment
> Plug Insertion Fruit Grasping
> Failed Failed

Figure 1: Tactile correction against the contact the plan expected. Tactile feedback becomes actionable once the model knows what contact it expected. (a) Ablation experiment of real-world tasks, recorded from sensors during inference. (b) The base model generates future observations and the action chunk jointly, after which the tactile expert corrects that chunk from the current tactile image and the cached tactile and action states. (c) Our key insight: the correction compares predicted against observed tactile, not the observation alone. (d) Success rate of each component ablation, averaged over the five real-robot tasks. task average by 16 points over the strongest baseline, and issues each correction in 30 .4 ms against a reused cache. Our main contributions are: (i) We identify a practical lim-itation of tactile-predictive WAMs: predicting future tactile observations raises task success but leaves most of the achiev-able gain unrealized, as the prediction is fixed once the action chunk is planned; (ii) We introduce TacPAC, which caches the predicted contact a planned chunk was conditioned on together with the plan itself, so that current tactile feedback is interpreted against what the plan anticipated rather than in isolation; (iii) We develop a single-pass tactile corrector, trained on the base model’s own plans at densely sampled execution offsets, and evaluate the resulting system across five contact-rich manipulation tasks. 

## 2 Related work 

World-action models. World-action models (WAMs) pre-dict how observations evolve under actions and condition action generation on that prediction. Recent systems adapt a pretrained video model into a policy by encoding actions as latent frames of its diffusion process (Kim et al. 2026), cas-cade a video and an action diffusion transformer so that inter-mediate denoising features rather than decoded frames condi-tion the action (Ma et al. 2026), organize video–action learn-ing around semantic events instead of fixed-length chunks (Li et al. 2026b), or learn from heterogeneous robot data to trans-fer across tasks and embodiments (Ye et al. 2026). Others question how much future generation is needed at test time, retaining video co-training while skipping future prediction at inference (Yuan et al. 2026d). Our base model is archi-tecturally closest to LingBot-VA, which couples vision and action tokens in a Mixture-of-Transformers and re-conditions on ground-truth observations during closed-loop rollout (Li et al. 2026a). In all of these models, however, both the pre-dicted future and the feedback that refines it remain almost exclusively visual, so they cannot anticipate the slip, incipi-ent contact, or slight misalignment that decide contact-rich manipulation. TacPAC keeps this predictive backbone but makes both the prediction and the feedback tactile. 

Tactile manipulation and tactile-predictive models. 

Tactile sensing measures the contact state that vision can-not resolve, yet manipulation has used it almost exclusively as a present-time signal. High-resolution vision-based sen-sors (Lambeta et al. 2020; Donlon et al. 2018) and self-supervised tactile encoders (Higuera et al. 2024; Zhao et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2024) feed loops closed on the current read-ing: tactile servoing and compliance control (Lepora and Lloyd 2020; Hogan et al. 2020; Tang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023), visuo-tactile policies (Lee et al. 2018; Li et al. 2022; Huang et al. 2024; George et al. 2025), and VLAs conditioned on the current tactile or force signal (Xue et al. 2025; Huang et al. 2025; Zhang et al. 2025; Yu et al. 2025; Yuan et al. 2026a), for which N0-Foundation consolidates hardware, data, and benchmarks (NeoteAI Team and Fudan TEAI Team 2026a). A recent line instead brings tactile into 

predictive models (He et al. 2024; Heng et al. 2025; Niu et al. 2026b; Zang et al. 2026; Zheng et al. 2026; Ye et al. 2025; NeoteAI Team and Fudan TEAI Team 2026b), but prediction and correction remain separate abilities: Dream-Tac anticipates contact yet commits to the chunk in a single generative pass (Lou et al. 2026), while T-Rex refines an already-generated chunk from the live tactile stream without predicting tactile at all, so its correction has no expectation to read against (Niu et al. 2026a). TacPAC instead turns the prediction into a live reference: the predicted tactile keys and values the chunk was planned under are retained, and every incoming tactile image is read against them inside at-tention, so a correction responds to how contact departs from what the plan assumed rather than to the reading alone. The distinction is measurable: at identical base model, corrector, and tactile input, blocking the corrector’s access to the cached prediction costs 17 points of average success (Sec. 4.3). 

## 3 Method 

3.1 Problem formulation 

The policy is conditioned on a task instruction, the current vi-sual observation, and the proprioceptive state. At every time step t the tactile sensor additionally provides a raw image It

of its contact surface. The policy generates an action chunk 

a = {ai}H−1 

> i=0

of horizon H together with future visual and tactile observations. Since both modalities arrive as images, we tile them into one video stream encoded into a single latent 

z: each tactile sensor enters as an additional view alongside the cameras, so predicting future tactile observations is part of predicting future video. Both observation and action generation use conditional flow matching. For a clean sample x and Gaussian noise ϵ,we construct 

xτ = (1 − τ )x + τ ϵ, τ ∈ [0 , 1] , (1) with target velocity u = ϵ − x. The observed first frame is kept clean, whereas future observation latents and the action chunk start from noise. The flow time τ indexes this gen-eration path alone and is unrelated to the physical time t at which observations arrive. TacPAC builds on a tactile-predictive world-action model: a video expert and an action expert organized as a Mixture-of-Transformers (MoT) (Liang et al. 2025), which predict the velocities for the noised video latent zτ and action chunk aτ

and interact through layer-wise attention over the concate-nated token sequence. An asymmetric mask lets every action query attend to all video and action tokens, whereas video queries attend only to video tokens, so predicted observa-tions condition action generation while noisy actions never disturb observation prediction. Because that video stream in-cludes the tactile views, tactile tokens play two roles at once: they are part of what the model generates, and, since action queries attend to them at every layer, they are also part of what the chunk is generated from. The chunk is thus condi-tioned on the contact the model predicts its own actions will produce. We call this model the base model . Its estimate of the clean chunk, written ˆa, is the planned action chunk : the actions committed before any execution feedback. That conditioning, however, is fixed once the chunk is planned: the anticipated contact is an assumption made be-fore execution, and nothing revises the plan when the contact that actually occurs departs from it. TacPAC adds a correc-tion path for exactly this situation (Fig. 2). Sec. 3.2 describes the cache and the tactile expert that reads it, while Sec. 3.3 describes the two training stages and inference. 

3.2 Prediction-grounded tactile correction 

Motivation. Correcting an action chunk from tactile feed-back requires knowing not only what is being sensed but what should have been sensed. A corrector that sees only the current tactile image can tell that the fingers are loaded, but not whether that load is the one the chunk was planned for. The same reading can call for opposite responses depending on whether contact was expected at this execution stage. In the base model this expectation is available: the chunk was denoised jointly with a predicted future tactile stream and attends to it at every layer, so an error in the prediction prop-agates into a correlated error in the chunk. We therefore hand the corrector that prediction together with the chunk’s own internal representation, so that a new tactile image is read against the contact the chunk anticipated. 

Caching the prediction and the plan. Once the base model has completed the denoising schedule, we run one ad-ditional pass over the denoised video latent and the planned chunk ˆa at flow time τ = 0 and store the per-layer attention keys and values it produces. We pay for this extra pass rather than reusing the keys already produced by the final denois-ing step, ensuring that the resulting cache represents a clean prediction rather than a still-noisy one. The cache C retains two groups: the tactile views, which encode the contact the model predicted across the horizon, and the action tokens, which encode the planned chunk as the model represented it while attending to that prediction. Visual keys are not re-tained: what a correction must resolve is a contact that can change within a few action steps, whereas the scene it takes place in changes little over a chunk and is already carried by both stored groups, which were computed while attending to it. The cache is built once per chunk and read unchanged by every subsequent correction. 

Tactile expert. The tactile expert is a single-pass corrector. When a tactile image arrives after m actions of the chunk have been executed, its query sequence holds the current tac-tile image Im and an updated version of the planned chunk 

ˆa. The image is encoded by the same frozen video tokenizer and tactile patch embedding that produced the cached tac-tile keys, allowing it to enter their embedding space. For the updated chunk, we replace the first m entries with the commands actually sent to the robot, retain the base model’s planned values for the remaining entries, and augment each entry with a learned status embedding indicating whether the corresponding action has been executed or not. Every layer attends these queries jointly to C and to the expert’s own tokens. The expert outputs a per-step delta action 

∆a = f (Im, ˆa, m, C) , (2) which is added to ˆa to give the corrected chunk ˆa + ∆ a.The expert shares the depth and attention geometry of the base experts so that it can consume their per-layer cache. The instruction reaches it only through those keys, which were produced under text conditioning. It is conditioned on the execution offset m rather than on a flow time: the offset places the arriving tactile frame at a stage of the plan, fixing which part of the cached prediction it should be read against and how much of the chunk remains revisable. Tactile Expert Action Expert Video Expert 

Shared Self Attention Tactile-Action KV cache      

> Future Visual Future Tactile Planned Action Delta Action
> Predict Future Visual & Tactile High-freq. Action Correction with Tactile Joint Action Generation
> Input Tactile Asynchronous Tactile Input Visual

## Stage1 Stage2 

Correct 

> Noise

Figure 2: Overview of TacPAC. Our method uses a three-expert Mixture-of-Transformers architecture: a video expert predicts future visual and tactile observations, an action expert conditions on these predictions to generate the planned action chunk 

ˆa, and a tactile expert outputs a delta action ∆a that corrects ˆa from the cached tactile–action KV and the current tactile observation. Since the cache is reused, this correction runs asynchronously at the tactile frame rate without rerunning the other two experts. Stage 1 trains the video and action experts. Stage 2 freezes them and trains only the tactile expert. 

Technical advantage. Cache-based correction offers two practical benefits. First, each correction requires only one forward pass of the tactile expert over the tactile tokens and 

H action tokens, attending to a fixed cache. It does not re-visit the video stream or denoising schedule. By contrast, refreshing predicted contact would rerun the video expert over the full multi-view canvas, nearly matching the cost of a new plan. Cache reuse therefore supports corrections at the tactile-frame arrival rate. Second, each correction is added to the original planned chunk rather than the previously cor-rected one. The expert still reads the commands actually sent as its executed prefix, but its new delta replaces the previous correction on the remaining steps. Thus, a spurious correc-tion does not propagate to later updates. This behavior is learned through attention without explicitly comparing pre-dicted and observed tactile images. Component ablations in Sec. 4 evaluate the benefit of the cached prediction over using only the current tactile image. 

3.3 Training and inference 

Stage 1: base model. We first train the video and action experts over the complete flow interval, with the first visual– tactile frame as the observation condition and independently noised future latents and actions processed jointly by MoT. The objective is a weighted sum of a video and an action flow-matching loss: the video term covers both the future visual and the future tactile latents, and the action term is applied in action space after converting the predicted velocity to a clean-action estimate. Stage 1 yields a base model that plans action chunks without the tactile expert. 

Stage 2: tactile expert. Stage 2 freezes everything trained in Stage 1 and optimizes only the tactile expert, initialized 

Algorithm 1 Training and inference for tactile-expert. Training — Tactile-expert update, base model frozen 

Require: ground-truth chunk a with tactile images {It},horizon H, offsets per chunk K 

> 1:

Plan ˆa with the frozen base model and prefill C, 

> 2:

for k = 1 , . . . , K do  

> 3:

Sample an offset m ∼ Unif {0, . . . , H −1}, 

> 4:

Overwrite the first m entries of ˆa with ground truth,  

> 5:

Compute ∆a ← f (Im, ˆa, m, C) and accumulate (3) for i ≥ m, 

> 6:

end for Inference — One action chunk  

> 1:

The base model completes denoising and returns ˆa

{robot execution starts here},  

> 2:

Prefill C from the denoised video latent and ˆa, 

> 3:

while the chunk is not exhausted do  

> 4:

A tactile frame arrives at offset m: ∆a ←

f (Im, ˆa, m, C), 

> 5:

Commit ˆai + ∆ ai for i ≥ m + d, 

> 6:

end while 

from the trained action expert so that it starts from a module that already knows how to read the base model’s per-layer states. Each update reproduces the deployment path (Algo-rithm 1, Training ): the frozen base model plans a chunk under the denoising schedule used at test time, and the prefill of Sec. 3.2 builds C from that chunk. Training on the model’s own plan rather than on the ground-truth chunk is what keeps the two paths consistent, since the quantity the expert must correct is precisely the gap between what the base model plans and what the task requires. Executed  Executing  To Be Corrected    

> 0mm+d H

Figure 3: Asynchronous inference of the tactile expert. Atactile frame at chunk offset m triggers a delta action ∆a

that arrives d steps later: steps before m (blue) already ran, steps in [m, m +d) (orange) run while ∆a computes, and only steps from m+d to H (yellow) apply it. The dataloader supplies several execution offsets per train-ing episode, each paired with the tactile image recorded at that offset. For an offset m, the executed prefix is filled with the ground-truth actions—the commands that produced that tactile image—while the remaining steps keep their planned values, and the expert is supervised only where a correction can still be applied: 

Ltac = 1

H − m

X

> i≥m

∥ˆai + ∆ ai − ai∥2 . (3) The delta action is thus supervised to be exactly the resid-ual between the planned chunk and the ground-truth actions on the unexecuted suffix, conditioned on the tactile evidence available at that point of execution. Sampling offsets densely across the horizon exposes the expert to every execution stage, and because one frozen plan and one prefill are shared by all offsets drawn for the same episode, this supervision costs little more than a single base forward pass. 

Inference. A chunk is served in three steps (Algorithm 1, 

Inference ). The robot begins executing the action chunk as soon as the base model generates it. The prefill is then com-puted while the first actions are already in flight. Every tactile frame that arrives thereafter triggers one correction against the active chunk, and the base model runs again only once the horizon is exhausted. Because the arm keeps moving while a correction com-putes, the correction cannot be applied at the offset it was conditioned on: by the time it returns, those commands have been sent. Each correction is therefore conditioned at the off-set m at which its tactile frame was taken—the pairing the expert was trained on—but written back only from m+d on-ward, where d is the largest correction latency observed in a short recent window, expressed in action steps. Steps inside that window keep the values most recently committed for them, and already-executed actions are immutable (Fig. 3). In practice this window is nearly empty: a correction re-turns within about one action step of the tactile frame that triggered it, so d is zero for most of execution and each cor-rection rewrites almost the entire unexecuted remainder of the chunk. Sec. 4 reports the measured latency, the achieved correction rate, and their effect on task success. 

## 4 Experiments 

We structure the evaluation around four questions: ( Q1 ) over-all performance on contact-rich manipulation, ( Q2 ) why tac-tile prediction alone leaves a large gap to the full system, ( Q3 )which of tactile input, tactile prediction, the tactile expert, and the cached prediction that expert reads are necessary, and ( Q4 ) whether the tactile expert is fast enough to correct a chunk in real time. Q1 is reported as results and analysis (Sec. 4.2), while Q2–Q4 form the ablation study (Sec. 4.3) that isolates individual design choices. 

4.1 Experimental setup 

Robot and observation–action interface. We evaluate on a single-arm Flexiv Rizon 4 whose gripper integrates two In-Tac S1 tactile sensors, with a wrist-mounted Intel RealSense D405 and a third-person Intel RealSense D435i. TacPAC takes a task instruction, the two camera views, propriocep-tion, and the two tactile views, while vision-only baselines and the vision only ablation drop the tactile views. The tactile expert runs asynchronously while a chunk executes, so cor-rections apply within the same chunk rather than at the next replanning step. The supplement reports the action space, control rate, and model configuration. 

Tasks and success criteria. The five tasks—charger-plug insertion, multi-object fruit transfer, fragile potato-chip transfer, empty-bottle uprighting, and expansion-card insertion—exercise tight alignment, regulated grip force, fragile-object handling, and multi-stage execution. Upright-ing an empty bottle is as much a force-regulation task as a reorientation one: the bottle is light enough that an over-firm grasp keeps it pinched between the fingers, so it fails to re-lease and settle upright when they open. Every episode has a predeclared binary success condition, and damage counts as failure for fruit and potato-chip manipulation. The sup-plement gives one representative image and a complete de-scription per task, including the initial configuration, reset protocol, and exact success criterion. 

Baselines. External baselines cover a general VLA (π0.5) (Physical Intelligence et al. 2025), action-chunking imitation (ACT) (Zhao et al. 2023), a visuo-tactile policy (VI-TaL) (George et al. 2025), a world-action model (LingBot-VA) (Li et al. 2026a), and two closely related tactile world-action models (Dream-Tac and T-Rex) (Lou et al. 2026; Niu et al. 2026a). All are adapted to the same robot and ac-tion interface and keep their official observation modalities: vision-only methods are not retrofitted with tactile input, while Dream-Tac and T-Rex retain tactile sensing. 

Evaluation protocol. For each method on each task we run 20 real-world evaluation trials under the same task def-initions, success criteria, real-world setup, and trial budget, and report the per-task episode success rate together with its average across tasks. 

4.2 Results and analysis 

Q1: Overall contact-rich manipulation Plug Fruit Chip Bottle Card Average                 

> 020 40 60 80 100
> Success rate (%)
> 60 50 70 0036 00000030 20 55 5022 10 40 70 20 028 55 40 85 25 20 45 65 35 75 30 35 48
> 80 65 90 40 45 64
> π0.5 ACT VITaL LingBot-VA Dream-Tac T-Rex TacPAC (ours)

Figure 4: Main results on the five contact-rich real-robot tasks. Per-task and average episode success rates, 20 trials per method per task. TacPAC attains the highest success rate on every task. Table 1: Component ablation of the tactile pathway. Each row cuts one pathway from tactile sensing to action—tactile 

prediction , execution-time correction , or the corrector’s cache access (–: no corrector). Best blue , second best green .                                                         

> Tactile pathway Success rate (%) ↑
> Variant Prediction Correction Cache Plug Fruit Chip Bottle Card Average Vision only (w/o tactile) ××–15 30 60 5022 w/o tactile expert (prediction only) ✓×–35 50 65 20 15 37 w/o tactile prediction ×✓×40 25 45 30 25 33 w/o tactile cache ✓✓×40 50 75 40 30 47
> TacPAC (Ours) ✓✓✓80 65 90 40 45 64

Overall comparison. Figure 4 reports per-task success rates and their average. TacPAC attains the highest success rate on all five tasks and averages 64%, 16 points above the strongest baseline, T-Rex (48%). Measured against the best baseline for each task, the margin is largest on charger-plug insertion (80% vs. 65%) and multi-object fruit transfer (65% vs. 50%), and smallest on potato-chip transfer (90% vs. 85%), the least demanding task in the suite, where four baselines already reach 70% or above. Difficulty concen-trates on the two tightest-tolerance tasks: expansion-card in-sertion is never completed by any baseline outside the two tactile world-action models, and empty-bottle uprighting is never completed by π0.5 or ACT. Neither ingredient by it-self accounts for this. VITaL, a reactive visuo-tactile policy (22%), and LingBot-VA, a vision-only WAM (28%), both fall below the vision-only VLA π0.5 (36%), and only Dream-Tac (45%) and T-Rex (48%), which combine tactile sensing with world-action modeling, improve on it. Overall, TacPAC combines tactile prediction with prediction-informed action correction and, even without pretraining, outperforms every prior method evaluated across all five tasks. 

Comparison with tactile world-action models. Dream-Tac and T-Rex lead on different groups of tasks, and the split follows what each one lacks. Dream-Tac leads on the two tasks whose success criterion counts damage—potato-chip transfer (85% vs. 75%) and fruit transfer (40% vs. 35%)— where the grip has to be right as contact is established, a deci-sion its anticipated contact gives it a prior for. It falls behind on the two tight-tolerance insertions, plug (55% vs. 65%) and card (20% vs. 35%), in which the misalignment becomes observable only through contact partway into the chunk: a chunk committed in a single generative pass cannot act on evidence that arrives after it is issued. T-Rex shows the oppo-site pattern. Revising the chunk from the live tactile stream makes it the strongest baseline on both insertions, but each reading arrives with no statement of what contact the plan expected, so it responds only once a physical error has been sensed—and on the damage-scored tasks that is often too late, since a crushed chip is not restored by a later correc-tion. TacPAC leads on both groups—90% and 65% on chip and fruit, 80% and 45% on plug and card—as expected if a correction is read against the contact the plan anticipated rather than against the reading alone. Q3 removes exactly that access while leaving both abilities in place. 

4.3 Ablation study 

Q2: Why is tactile prediction alone insufficient? Data-level evidence. We measure ct, the mean absolute change between consecutive frames averaged over the two tactile views, on training episodes of all five tasks, and la-bel execution phases from the measured gripper width alone (full protocol in the supplement). Contact transitions are the most active phase in every task, and also one of the shortest: they hold 4.9% of the frames but 18.6% of the total tactile change (Fig. 5). Most of the prediction objective is there-fore dominated by frames in which the tactile image barely changes. Moreover, the active frames become available only after execution of the action chunk has begun: they occur within the chunk rather than before it, by which point the contact-conditioned plan has already been committed. Plug Fruit Chip Bottle Card        

> 01246
> Relative tactile change Plug Fruit Chip Bottle Card
> 025 50
> % of frames (a) (b)
> Pre-contact Contact transition Sustained contact Post-contact

Figure 5: Tactile analysis by execution phase. (a) Adjacent tactile change relative to the episode mean (dashed line). 

(b) Proportion of an episode’s frames. 

Evaluation-level evidence. Consistent with that limit, adding the prediction objective raises success only part of the way. Under matched data, backbone, action interface, optimization steps, and evaluation resets, predicting tactile observations lifts the base WAM from 22% to 37% average success (Table 1, vision only vs. w/o tactile expert ), whereas the full system reaches 64%: roughly a third of the total gain over the vision-centric WAM is available from the prediction objective alone. Prediction can state what contact to expect, but nothing acts on the discrepancy until a correction path reads it, which Q3 tests. 

Q3: Which components enable tactile action correction? Component ablation design. Each variant in Table 1 cuts one pathway between tactile sensing and the executed ac-tion. Vision only removes all tactile views and the tactile expert, leaving a visual–action WAM. Without tactile ex-pert retains the tactile-predictive base model and its planned chunk but removes real-time correction, isolating tactile pre-diction alone. The remaining two variants keep the tactile expert, and with it the current tactile image, and differ only in what that image is read against. Without tactile predic-tion removes tactile views from both the input and prediction target of the video expert. The planned chunk is therefore built from visual observations alone, and no predicted tactile enters the cache. The retained expert corrects that visually planned chunk from the current tactile image, making this variant a reactive tactile corrector on our own backbone. 

Without tactile cache keeps the prediction and the plan made under it, but blocks the expert’s attention to the cached tac-tile keys, removing only its direct access to the anticipated contact. TacPAC retains all paths. 

Every pathway is necessary, and the cached prediction is what the corrector needs. TacPAC reaches 64% average success, compared with 37% without the tactile expert and 33% without tactile prediction. Prediction without correction and reactive correction without prediction perform similarly, and neither approaches the full system, indicating that nei-ther pathway substitutes for the other. The cleanest evidence Table 2: Inference efficiency of TacPAC. Average wall-clock latency and the corresponding rate of each inference stage.           

> Inference stage Latency (ms) ↓Rate (Hz) ↑
> Chunk generation (ten flow steps) 628.6 1.59 Cache prefill (one clean pass) 62.6 15.97 Tactile correction (one pass) 30.4 32.90

for the cached prediction comes from without tactile cache 

vs. TacPAC: the base model, tactile expert, current tactile image, and parameter count are unchanged. Only the ex-pert’s access to the cached tactile keys differs. Enabling that access raises success from 47% to 64%, supporting our cen-tral claim that current tactile feedback should be read against the anticipated contact. This interpretation is reinforced by the reactive variant, which falls below vision only on the two damage-sensitive tasks, chip transfer (45% vs. 60%) and fruit transfer (25% vs. 30%), suggesting that tactile feedback without an expectation can pull actions away from an already correct plan. Finally, because without tactile cache still plans under tactile prediction, its 14-point gain over without tactile prediction measures the value of tactile-predictive planning without direct cache access. Granting the corrector that ac-cess supplies the remaining 17 points. 

Q4: Can the tactile expert correct a chunk in real time? 

As shown in Table 2, one tactile-expert pass takes only 

30 .4 ms, corresponding to an execution rate of 32 .90 Hz and a 20 .7× reduction in latency relative to regenerating an action chunk. The tactile expert can therefore respond to incoming tactile feedback at high frequency. We further measure execution traces across all five tasks. In only 1.6% 

of tactile-expert calls does the robot advance by one or more control steps while the correction is being computed. Almost all corrections are thus returned before the next step. More-over, the asynchronous inference scheme of Sec. 3.3 keeps the robot executing the latest committed chunk and writes each correction only to its unexecuted suffix. We consequently observe no correction-induced jerks in the executed motion. 

## 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduce TacPAC, a tactile world-action model for contact-rich manipulation. Unlike prior tactile world-action models, whose predicted contact is fixed once the action chunk is planned, TacPAC turns tactile prediction into real-time correction during execution. A tactile expert reads each new tactile image against the layer-wise tactile cache, correcting the planned action chunk asynchronously. We evaluate TacPAC on five real-world contact-rich manipu-lation tasks, where it attains the highest success rate on every task and improves the average by 16 points over the strongest baseline. Each correction takes only 30 .4 ms, 20 .7× cheaper than replanning. Overall, our results indicate that tactile pre-diction and tactile correction are complementary, and that reading contact feedback against an explicit expectation is a practical route to closed-loop contact-rich manipulation. References 

Black, K.; Brown, N.; Driess, D.; Esmail, A.; Equi, M.; Finn, C.; Fusai, N.; Groom, L.; Hausman, K.; Ichter, B.; Jakubczak, S.; Jones, T.; Ke, L.; Levine, S.; Li-Bell, A.; Mothukuri, M.; Nair, S.; Pertsch, K.; Shi, L. X.; Tanner, J.; Vuong, Q.; Walling, A.; Wang, H.; and Zhilinsky, U. 2024. π0: A Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for General Robot Control. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 .Brohan, A.; Brown, N.; Carbajal, J.; Chebotar, Y.; Chen, X.; Choromanski, K.; Ding, T.; Driess, D.; Dubey, A.; Finn, C.; Florence, P.; Fu, C.; Arenas, M. G.; Gopalakrishnan, K.; Han, K.; Hausman, K.; Herzog, A.; Hsu, J.; Ichter, B.; Irpan, A.; Joshi, N.; Julian, R.; Kalashnikov, D.; Kuang, Y.; Leal, I.; Lee, L.; Lee, T.-W. E.; Levine, S.; Lu, Y.; Michalewski, H.; Mordatch, I.; Pertsch, K.; Rao, K.; Reymann, K.; Ryoo, M.; Salazar, G.; Sanketi, P.; Sermanet, P.; Singh, J.; Singh, A.; Soricut, R.; Tran, H.; Vanhoucke, V.; Vuong, Q.; Wahid, A.; Welker, S.; Wohlhart, P.; Wu, J.; Xia, F.; Xiao, T.; Xu, P.; Xu, S.; Yu, T.; and Zitkovich, B. 2023. RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818 .Donlon, E.; Dong, S.; Liu, M.; Li, J.; Adelson, E.; and Ro-driguez, A. 2018. GelSlim: A High-Resolution, Compact, Robust, and Calibrated Tactile-sensing Finger. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.00628 .George, A.; Gano, S.; Katragadda, P.; and Farimani, A. B. 2025. VITaL Pretraining: Visuo-Tactile Pretraining for Tac-tile and Non-Tactile Manipulation Policies. In 2025 IEEE In-ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,258–264. IEEE. He, Z.; Fang, H.; Chen, J.; Fang, H.-S.; and Lu, C. 2024. FoAR: Force-Aware Reactive Policy for Contact-Rich Robotic Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15753 .Heng, L.; Geng, H.; Zhang, K.; Abbeel, P.; and Malik, J. 2025. ViTacFormer: Learning Cross-Modal Representation for Visuo-Tactile Dexterous Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15953 .Higuera, C.; Sharma, A.; Bodduluri, C. K.; Fan, T.; Lan-caster, P.; Kalakrishnan, M.; Kaess, M.; Boots, B.; Lambeta, M.; Wu, T.; and Mukadam, M. 2024. Sparsh: Self-supervised touch representations for vision-based tactile sensing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24090 .Hogan, F. R.; Ballester, J.; Dong, S.; and Rodriguez, A. 2020. Tactile Dexterity: Manipulation Primitives with Tactile Feed-back. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.03236 .Huang, B.; Wang, Y.; Yang, X.; Luo, Y.; and Li, Y. 2024. 3D-ViTac: Learning Fine-Grained Manipulation with Visuo-Tactile Sensing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24091 .Huang, J.; Wang, S.; Lin, F.; Hu, Y.; Wen, C.; and Gao, Y. 2025. Tactile-VLA: Unlocking Vision-Language-Action Model’s Physical Knowledge for Tactile Generalization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.09160 .Kim, M. J.; Gao, Y.; Lin, T.-Y.; Lin, Y.-C.; Ge, Y.; Lam, G.; Liang, P.; Song, S.; Liu, M.-Y.; Finn, C.; et al. 2026. Cosmos policy: Fine-tuning video models for visuomotor control and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.16163 .Kim, M. J.; Pertsch, K.; Karamcheti, S.; Xiao, T.; Balakr-ishna, A.; Nair, S.; Rafailov, R.; Foster, E.; Lam, G.; Sanketi, P.; Vuong, Q.; Kollar, T.; Burchfiel, B.; Tedrake, R.; Sadigh, D.; Levine, S.; Liang, P.; and Finn, C. 2024. OpenVLA: An Open-Source Vision-Language-Action Model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246 .Lambeta, M.; Chou, P.-W.; Tian, S.; Yang, B.; Maloon, B.; Most, V. R.; Stroud, D.; Santos, R.; Byagowi, A.; Kammerer, G.; Jayaraman, D.; and Calandra, R. 2020. DIGIT: A Novel Design for a Low-Cost Compact High-Resolution Tactile Sensor with Application to In-Hand Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.14679 .Lee, M. A.; Zhu, Y.; Srinivasan, K.; Shah, P.; Savarese, S.; Fei-Fei, L.; Garg, A.; and Bohg, J. 2018. Making Sense of Vision and Touch: Self-Supervised Learning of Multimodal Representations for Contact-Rich Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.10191 .Lepora, N. F.; and Lloyd, J. 2020. Pose-Based Tactile Ser-voing: Controlled Soft Touch using Deep Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.02504 .Li, H.; Zhang, Y.; Zhu, J.; Wang, S.; Lee, M. A.; Xu, H.; Adelson, E.; Fei-Fei, L.; Gao, R.; and Wu, J. 2022. See, Hear, and Feel: Smart Sensory Fusion for Robotic Manipulation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.03858 .Li, L.; Zhang, Q.; Luo, Y.; Yang, S.; Wang, R.; Han, F.; Yu, M.; Gao, Z.; Xue, N.; Zhu, X.; et al. 2026a. Causal World Modeling for Robot Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21998 .Li, S.; Yao, V.; Yang, C.; Qu, T.; Cheng, R.; Yu, R.; Lu, H.; Von, N.; Chen, V.; Tang, Y.; et al. 2026b. WALL-WM: Carving World Action Modeling at the Event Joints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.01955 .Liang, W.; Yu, L.; Luo, L.; Iyer, S.; Dong, N.; Zhou, C.; Ghosh, G.; Lewis, M.; Yih, W.-t.; Zettlemoyer, L.; and Lin, X. V. 2025. Mixture-of-Transformers: A Sparse and Scalable Architecture for Multi-Modal Foundation Models. Transac-tions on Machine Learning Research .Lou, Y.; Ye, Y.; Fu, Y.; Cen, J.; Chi, X.; Lyu, Y.; Jia, P.; Han, S.; Lu, Z.; and Zhang, S. 2026. Dream-Tac: A Unified Tactile World Action Model for Contact-Rich Robot Manipulation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.08737 .Ma, T.; Zheng, J.; Wang, Z.; Jiang, C.; Cui, A.; Liang, J.; and Yang, S. 2026. DiT4DiT: Jointly Modeling Video Dynamics and Actions for Generalizable Robot Control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.10448 .NeoteAI Team; and Fudan TEAI Team. 2026a. N0-Foundation: Towards the Age of Tactile Intelligence. Tech-nical Report .NeoteAI Team; and Fudan TEAI Team. 2026b. N0-TWAM: Scaling Tactile-Native World Action Model for Contact-Rich Manipulation. Technical Report .Niu, D.; Liu, Z.; Wang, Z.; Shao, B.; Yin, Z.-H.; Pai, A.; Sharma, Y.; Saravalle, S.; Zheng, R.; Wang, J.; Punamiya, R.; Xu, M.; Xie, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Fu, L.; Kallidromitis, K.; Gioia, M.; Zhang, J.; Ge, J.; Feng, H.; Galasso, F.; Zhan, W.; Chan, D. M.; Bai, Y.; Herzig, R.; Lei, J.; Fei-Fei, L.; Goldberg, K.; Malik, J.; Abbeel, P.; Zhu, Y.; Xu, D.; Fan, L.; and Darrell, T. 2026a. T-Rex: Tactile-Reactive Dexterous Manipulation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.17055 .Niu, Y.; Fang, Z.; Chen, B.; Zhou, S.; Senthilkumaran, R. K.; Zhang, H.; Chen, B.; Qiu, C.; Tseng, H. E.; Francis, J.; and Zhao, D. 2026b. Learning Versatile Humanoid Manipulation with Touch Dreaming. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.13015 .Physical Intelligence; Black, K.; Brown, N.; Darpinian, J.; Dhabalia, K.; Driess, D.; Esmail, A.; Equi, M.; Finn, C.; Fusai, N.; et al. 2025. π0.5: A Vision-Language-Action Model with Open-World Generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 .Tang, B.; Lin, M. A.; Akinola, I.; Handa, A.; Sukhatme, G. S.; Ramos, F.; Fox, D.; and Narang, Y. 2023. IndustReal: Transferring Contact-Rich Assembly Tasks from Simulation to Reality. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17110 .Team, X. R.; Guo, J.; Jin, P.; Li, J.; Li, P.; Li, Y.; Liu, F.; Peng, W.; Qin, O.; Su, Y.; et al. 2026. Xiaomi-Robotics-1: Scaling Vision-Language-Action Models with over 100K Hours of Real-World Trajectories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.15330 .Wang, Q.; Li, M.; Guan, J.; Ye, J.; Xie, S.; Liu, Y.; Chen, J.; Liang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Hu, X.; Huang, X.; Lin, P.; Lin, J.; Liu, D.; Bai, S.; Zhou, J.; Zhang, J.; Yuan, H.; Zhou, G.; Yin, H.; Wang, Y.; Huang, Y.; Lei, Z.; Peng, W.; Chen, D.; Zheng, Y.; Fan, J.; Zhuang, X.; Zhou, X.; Li, H.; Chen, A.; Zhang, T.; Liu, X.; Sun, Y.; Chen, R.; Li, Z.; Lü, C.; Yang, Z.; Yu, T.; and Chen, X. 2026. Qwen-VLA: Unifying Vision-Language-Action Modeling across Tasks, Environments, and Robot Embodiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.30280 .Wu, W.; Wang, F.; Lu, F.; Sun, H.; Liu, S.; Wang, Y.; Yan, Y.; Wang, Y.; Ma, S.; Wang, X.; et al. 2026. From Foundation to Application: Improving VLA Models in Practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.06403 .Xue, H.; Ren, J.; Chen, W.; Zhang, G.; Fang, Y.; Gu, G.; Xu, H.; and Lu, C. 2025. Reactive diffusion policy: Slow-fast visual-tactile policy learning for contact-rich manipulation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.02881 .Yang, F.; Feng, C.; Chen, Z.; Park, H.; Wang, D.; Dou, Y.; Zeng, Z.; Chen, X.; Gangopadhyay, R.; Owens, A.; and Wong, A. 2024. Binding Touch to Everything: Learning Unified Multimodal Tactile Representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18084 .Ye, G.; Zhang, Z.; Zhao, X.; Wu, S.; Lu, H.; Lu, S.; and Liu, H. 2025. Learning to Feel the Future: Dream-TacVLA for Contact-Rich Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.23864 .Ye, S.; Ge, Y.; Zheng, K.; Gao, S.; Yu, S.; Kurian, G.; Indupuru, S.; Tan, Y. L.; Zhu, C.; Xiang, J.; et al. 2026. World action models are zero-shot policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15922 .Yu, J.; Liu, H.; Yu, Q.; Ren, J.; Hao, C.; Ding, H.; Huang, G.; Huang, G.; Song, Y.; Cai, P.; Lu, C.; and Zhang, W. 2025. ForceVLA: Enhancing VLA Models with a Force-aware MoE for Contact-rich Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22159 .Yu, R.; Zhang, P.; Liu, S.; Liu, B.; Kang, M.; Li, S.; Shi, L.; Ma, E.; Yang, P.; Pan, C.; et al. 2026. Wall-oss-0.5 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.30877 .Yuan, C.; Zhang, Z.; Zhou, M.; Chen, W.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Niu, D.; Wang, S.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, W.; et al. 2026a. Ftp-1: A generalist foundation tactile policy across tac-tile sensors for contact-rich manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.13102 .Yuan, H.; Liang, Z.; Chen, A.; Wang, Y.; Li, H.; Lin, P.; Huang, Y.; Lei, Z.; Zhang, T.; Zhang, J.; et al. 2026b. Qwen-robotmanip technical report: Alignment unlocks scale for robotic manipulation foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.17846 .Yuan, H.; Yi, W.; Zhang, Z.; Chen, W.; Mo, Y.; Yin, J.; Li, X.; Zeng, X.; Wen, C.; Lu, C.; et al. 2026c. Vtam: Video-tactile-action models for complex physical interaction beyond vlas. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.23481 .Yuan, T.; Dong, Z.; Liu, Y.; and Zhao, H. 2026d. Fast-WAM: Do World Action Models Need Test-Time Future Imagina-tion? arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.16666 .Zang, Y.; Zheng, Y.; Nie, X.; Zheng, Y.; Tian, S.; Gu, S.; Gao, C.; Wang, Z.; Yan, S.; and Ding, W. 2026. TacFore-Sight: Force-Guided Tactile World Model for Contact-Rich Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.11184 .Zhang, C.; Hao, P.; Cao, X.; Hao, X.; Cui, S.; and Wang, S. 2025. VTLA: Vision-Tactile-Language-Action Model with Preference Learning for Insertion Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09577 .Zhang, H.; Xiang, L.; Lin, H.; Huang, Z.; Wang, M.; Zhong, D.; Dong, Y.; Wu, Y.; Rao, Y.; Zhang, D.; et al. 2026a. Hy-Embodied-0.5-VLA: From Vision-Language-Action Mod-els to a Real-World Robot Learning Stack. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.14409 .Zhang, X.; Wang, C.; Sun, L.; Wu, Z.; Zhu, X.; and Tomizuka, M. 2023. Efficient Sim-to-real Transfer of Contact-Rich Manipulation Skills with Online Admittance Residual Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10509 .Zhang, Y.; Zhang, W.; Qi, Z.; Zhang, H.; Lin, H.; Zhang, J.; Mu, Y.; Yang, X.; Zeng, W.; and Jin, X. 2026b. ImageWAM: Do World Action Models Really Need Video Generation, or Just Image Editing? arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.19531 .Zhao, J.; Ma, Y.; Wang, L.; and Adelson, E. H. 2024. Transferable Tactile Transformers for Representation Learn-ing Across Diverse Sensors and Tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13640 .Zhao, T. Z.; Kumar, V.; Levine, S.; and Finn, C. 2023. Learn-ing Fine-Grained Bimanual Manipulation with Low-Cost Hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.13705 .Zheng, Y.; Gu, S.; Li, W.; Zheng, Y.; Zang, Y.; Tian, S.; Li, X.; Hao, C.; Gao, C.; Liu, S.; Li, H.; Chen, Y.; Yan, S.; and Ding, W. 2026. OmniVTA: Visuo-Tactile World Modeling for Contact-Rich Robotic Manipulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.19201 .Appendix A Notation 

Table 3 summarizes the notation used in the main paper. Throughout, flow time τ always denotes the noise level of the conditional flow, whereas physical time t indexes execu-tion stages along the action horizon. An undecorated symbol denotes a clean (ground-truth) quantity, a subscript τ marks its noisy sample at flow time τ , and a hat marks a model estimate. Bold lower-case symbols denote vectors or vector-valued signals, and italic letters denote scalars and indices. 

## B Implementation details 

Model configuration. The video, action, and tactile ex-perts share 30 Transformer layers and identical attention geometry (24 heads of dimension 128), so the tactile ex-pert can consume the base experts’ per-layer caches. Their hidden and feed-forward widths are 3072/14336, 1024/4096, and 1024/4096, respectively. A linear bridge maps the video-frontend width (3072) to the tactile-expert width (1024). The tactile expert is initialized from the trained action expert, whose blocks it matches except for the absent cross-attention. Its output head is zero-initialized so that the first correction is the identity. 

Flow schedule and temporal layout. Chunk generation uses ten flow steps, after which one additional clean pass at 

τ = 0 builds the cache. The action horizon is H = 48 , and each action comprises a seven-dimensional joint command, expressed relative to the joint configuration at the first step of the chunk, and a one-dimensional gripper command. Com-mands are issued at 30 Hz, so one chunk spans 1.6 s of robot motion and is executed to its full horizon before the next chunk is planned. The video tokenizer has a VAE temporal stride of 4 and a future-frame stride of 4, so one latent frame covers 16 consecutive actions and the horizon spans three video latent frames. Visual views are rendered at 256 × 256 

and tactile views at 128 × 128 on the shared canvas. 

Stage-2 training. Each frozen plan and prefill is shared by K = 4 correction offsets, whose losses are averaged. Stage 2 freezes the video expert, action expert, VAE, text encoder, and proprioceptive encoder. Only the tactile expert is trainable. It is optimized at a base learning rate of 10 −4

under a cosine schedule. 

Optimization and computing infrastructure. Both stages are trained on a single node with eight NVIDIA H100 GPUs, using a global batch size of 64 for 10 epochs. The released implementation requires Python 3.10 or newer and pins transformers 4.57.0, accelerate 1.12.0, and 

DeepSpeed 0.16.9. RealSense D405 

> RealSense D435i
> Flexiv Rizon 4

Figure 6: Real-world experimental setup. We use a Flexiv Rizon 4 robot equipped with a wrist-mounted Intel RealSense D405 camera and a third-person Intel RealSense D435i cam-era. The gripper integrates two InTac S1 tactile sensors. Symbol Meaning Current configuration                                                               

> Observations, actions, and flow matching
> ItRaw tactile image at time t–
> a,HDemonstrated (clean) action chunk and its horizon H= 48 ˆaPlanned action chunk (base-model output, before correction) –
> zClean video latent covering visual and tactile views –
> x,ϵ,xτClean sample, Gaussian noise, and noisy interpolant –
> τFlow time (noise level) τ∈[0 ,1]
> uTarget flow velocity ϵ−x–
> zτ,aτNoisy video latent and action chunk at flow time τ–
> Tactile correction
> tPhysical-time (execution-stage) index –
> iAction position within the chunk i∈ { 0, . . . , H −1}
> mNumber of already executed actions (correction offset) m∈[0 , H )
> CPer-layer tactile and action key/value cache built by the prefill –
> fTactile expert –
> ∆aDelta action, yielding corrected chunk ˆa+ ∆ a–
> dDelay margin before which a correction is not written back action steps
> Training
> Ltac Stage-2 tactile correction loss –
> KCorrection offsets sampled per planned chunk K= 4
> Experimental diagnostics
> ctMean absolute tactile-image change between consecutive frames –
> nTactile view index n∈ { 1,2}

Table 3: Notation. Symbols used in the main paper and in this supplement, grouped by role. The last column lists the value in the current configuration where one is fixed, while “–” marks symbols whose value is context-dependent. 

## C Evaluation details 

Trial accounting and task reset. For every method–task pair, all 20 attempted evaluation trials are included in the reported success rate. Any failure to satisfy the task’s binary success criterion—including unsuccessful grasping, incom-plete insertion or transfer, object damage where prohibited, or failure to complete the task—is counted as a failure; no trial is excluded or repeated based on its outcome. Within each task, every method is evaluated with the same reset pro-cedure, task-specific initial configuration, trial budget, and binary success criterion. Before every trial, the robot and task objects are returned to the task’s stated starting config-uration without any method-specific adjustment. 

Baseline adaptation. We train all baselines using the hy-perparameters recommended by their official implementa-tions. For Dream-Tac, we additionally adjust its gating hy-perparameters to adapt it to our tactile sensors. 

## D Task descriptions 

Each task is described below and paired with the tactile-activity trace of one training episode, so that the phase struc-ture aggregated by the Q2 diagnostic can be inspected task by task. The displayed episode is the one whose per-phase activity profile is closest to that task’s median, selected be-fore inspecting any trace. In every figure, the upper two rows show six time-aligned visual and tactile observations from a separate successful rollout, with each tactile frame placed directly below its visual counterpart. The bottom plot shows tactile activity ct (dark) and measured gripper width (red) from the median-profile episode, so it is not frame-aligned with the rollout above. Background colors denote the execu-tion phases defined in Sec. E; the vertical scale of ct differs between tasks because the stored videos differ in bitrate. Approach Contact transition Sustained contact Post-contact 0 5 10 15 20 25 

Time (s) 

> 012
> ct
> 40 60 80 100
> Width (mm)

Figure 7: Charger plug insertion. At reset, an unplugged charger adapter stands next to the power strip. The robot must grasp the adapter, align its prongs with the designated outlet, and press it into the socket; an episode succeeds when the plug is seated in the target outlet. Approach Contact transition Sustained contact Post-contact 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 

Time (s) 

> 0.0 0.2 0.4
> ct
> 20 40 60 80 100
> Width (mm)

Figure 8: Multi-object fruit transfer. At reset, one fruit is placed on each of three source plates surrounding an empty yellow tray. The robot must transfer the fruits sequentially into the tray; an episode succeeds only when all three fruits are in the tray without visible damage. Approach Contact transition Sustained contact Post-contact 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 

Time (s) 

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
> ct
> 40 60 80 100
> Width (mm)

Figure 9: Fragile potato-chip pick-and-place. At reset, an intact potato chip lies in the source plate and the target plate is empty. The robot must grasp the chip without crushing it, carry it between the plates, and release it into the target; an episode succeeds only when the chip reaches the target plate without visible damage. Approach Contact transition Sustained contact Post-contact 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 

Time (s) 

> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
> ct
> 20 40 60 80 100
> Width (mm)

Figure 10: Empty bottle uprighting. At reset, a capped empty plastic bottle lies on its side. The robot must grasp the compliant bottle, rotate it to a vertical pose, place its base on the table, and release it; an episode succeeds only if the bottle remains stably upright after release. Approach Contact transition Sustained contact Post-contact 0 5 10 15 20 25 

Time (s) 

> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
> ct
> 025 50 75 100
> Width (mm)

Figure 11: Expansion-card insertion. At reset, the motherboard is fixed in the workspace and the expansion card stands beside the target slot. The robot must grasp the card, align its edge connector with the slot, and press it into the interface; an episode succeeds when the card is seated in the target slot. E Diagnostic for Q2 

This section gives the protocol behind the diagnostic reported in Q2 of the main paper. 

Tactile temporal activity. The diagnostic quantifies when tactile observations change, instead of assuming that their useful content is sparse. For the two tactile views we measure the per-frame mean absolute change 

ct = 12

> 2

X

> n=1

mean ( |It,n − It−1,n |) , (4) where n indexes the two tactile views and the mean is taken over all pixels. The diagnostic covers 296 episodes, about 60 per task, drawn at a fixed stride from each task’s episode list. After the exclusions below, 284,948 frames remain. 

Full result. Activity inside the contact-transition windows is 4.1 ± 0.1 times the episode mean, against 0.58 ± 0.03 

while the fingers are still travelling through free space, 1.36 ±

0.04 during sustained contact and 0.77 ± 0.03 after release. The ordering is not an average over a few extreme episodes: contact-transition activity exceeds the sustained-contact level in 99% of episodes and the approach level in 94%. The effect is weakest on the multi-object fruit task ( 1.7× the episode mean) and on chip transfer ( 2.0×), and strongest on the two tight-tolerance insertions and bottle uprighting ( 4.9 to 6.6×). 

Codec artifacts. The tactile streams are stored as HEVC video with a keyframe every 120 frames. The difference into a keyframe and the difference out of it are reconstruction discontinuities rather than sensor change, and are two orders of magnitude larger than a typical frame difference, so both are dropped, removing 1.7% of frames. Bitrate varies across episodes, from 25 to 152 kbit/s, so ct is not comparable between episodes in absolute terms. Every reported contrast is therefore formed within one episode, by dividing a phase mean by that episode’s own mean ct, and episodes are the unit over which means and standard errors are taken. Because a low bitrate quantises away small changes, absolute activity is understated, and understated most in the quietest phases. Repeating the measurement over a five-frame lag, which lets real deformation accumulate well beyond the quantiser step, leaves the result unchanged: contact-transition windows then hold 5.0% of frames and 18.5% of the total change, with activity 4.00 ± 0.18 times the episode mean. 

Execution-phase annotation. Phases are derived from the measured gripper width wt alone, a signal independent of the tactile stream. Teleoperated closures are staircases: the op-erator shuts the fingers in steps separated by pauses of up to a second, so neither a width threshold nor "narrowed and stationary" separates a pause in free space from an arrest against an object. What separates them is what follows. We median-filter wt, mark frames whose finger speed exceeds 10 mm/s as movements, and label each movement as closing or opening by its net travel, discarding movements shorter than 3 mm. A hold runs from the end of a closing movement to the start of the next opening movement, and holds shorter than 15 frames are discarded. A pause partway through a staircase is followed by more closing rather than by a re-lease, and so is not a hold. This uses no width threshold, which is what lets it segment the multi-object task, where the gripper reopens only partway between objects. Contact-transition windows are the 8 frames on either side of each hold boundary, sustained contact is the remainder of a hold, approach is everything before the first hold, and post-contact everything after the last one. Contact made earlier in a clo-sure, before the fingers stop travelling, is labelled approach, and contact between a held object and the environment is not marked at all. Both choices work against finding a contact effect rather than for it.