Title: Towards High-DoF Dexterous Manipulation through VLA Post-Training

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.19666v1

Published Time: Fri, 18 Sep 2026 00:44:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# Towards High-DoF Dexterous Manipulation through VLA Post-Training 

> Journal Title XX(X):1–27 ©The Author(s) 2026 Reprints and permission: sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned www.sagepub.com/

## Junlei Zhu 1,2* , Shenzhe Yao 1* , Chaogui Huang 1 , Wenkai Zhu 1,2 ,Jingwei Peng 1,2 , Guanqi He 1 , S¨ oren Schwertfeger 2 , Jiahao Chen 1 and Yide Liu 1

Abstract 

Imitation-learned vision–language–action (VLA) foundation models acquire broad manipulation capabilities by scaling robot data across tasks and embodiments, but reliable deployment on a specific downstream task and hardware platform still requires post-training. Dexterous hands make this adaptation particularly difficult: their broad behavioural repertoire and high degree of freedom create a large and structured action space. Three obstacles are central: open-source VLAs do not natively provide an action interface for high-DoF hands; gesture mismatch during human-gated DAgger takeover creates command discontinuities and contaminates corrective trajectories; and reinforcement learning in the raw joint space is sample-inefficient. We present a unified four-step post-training pipeline comprising a learned temporal hand-action codec, supervised fine-tuning, DAgger, and real-world residual reinforcement learning. The codec adapts a pretrained VLA to absolute dexterous-hand commands. Buffered rollback, pose alignment, and smooth command blending enable continuous, task-relevant DAgger corrections, while latent residual RL confines exploration to coordinated hand motions captured by the codec. We evaluate the pipeline on five diverse real-world tasks spanning bimanual transfer, in-hand reorientation, and tool use. Within the reported post-training budgets, the resulting policies achieve 100% success on every evaluated task over 20 trials per task. These results provide a practical path for adapting VLA foundation models to reliable real-world dexterous manipulation. 

Keywords 

Dexterous manipulation, real-world reinforcement learning 

## 1 Introduction 

Vision–language–action (VLA) foundation policies are increasingly capable across tasks and embodiments (Brohan et al. 2023; Open X-Embodiment Collaboration 2024; Octo Model Team et al. 2024; Black et al. 2024; Physical Intelligence et al. 2025). Despite this progress, deployment on a particular downstream task and hardware platform can 

> 1

Wuji Technology 

> 2

School of Information Science and Technology, Shang-haiTech University, China 

> *

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

Corresponding author: 

Yide Liu, Wuji Technology. Email: liu.yide@wuji.tech Project website: wuji.tech/blog/post-training-0.   

> Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2016/06/24 v1.10] arXiv:2609.19666v1 [cs.RO] 17 Sep 2026

2 Journal Title XX(X)  

> Figure 1. Overview of dexterous policy post-training. A learned hand-action representation provides a common interface for supervised fine-tuning, corrective data aggregation, and real-world latent residual reinforcement learning, which progressively improve task success. The curves on the right schematically illustrate improvement across post-training stages.

still expose systematic failures caused by differences in task distribution, embodiment, sensing, action interfaces, and encountered states. Task- and robot-specific post-training is therefore needed to turn these broad capabilities into reliable execution. Dexterous manipulation makes this adapta-tion particularly challenging. Compared with parallel grippers, dexterous hands support a broader range of manipulation behaviors, expose many more controlled degrees of free-dom, and require coordinated finger postures under multi-contact dynamics (Rajeswaran et al. 2018; OpenAI et al. 2020). The result-ing action space is both high-dimensional and strongly structured. This creates three obstacles across the post-training pipeline: establishing a compatible action interface, collecting clean human corrections, and exploring useful policy improvements efficiently on the real robot. 

The first obstacle is the mismatch between the pretrained VLA’s action interface and high-DoF hand control. The pretrained pol-icy’s fixed action output does not directly match the joint-command space of our bimanual dex-terous embodiment. We therefore train a tem-poral hand codec that maps coordinated hand trajectories into a compact latent action space compatible with the VLA. 

The second obstacle is gesture mismatch during DAgger intervention, which causes discontinuous high-DoF hand commands and contaminates corrective supervision. 

Recent dexterous human-in-the-loop systems have identified intervention discontinuity in high-DoF control, and HandITL attributes it to command mismatch between the operator and the policy and avoids it through relative hand retargeting and shared arm control (Han et al. 2026; Li et al. 2026b). We study a different interface constraint: both teleoperation and the reference VLA use absolute hand commands, which we retain so that demonstrations, cor-rections, and policy outputs share the same action semantics. Under this interface, directly  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 3

Table 1. Important symbols used throughout the paper, grouped by pipeline stage. 

Symbol Brief description Symbol Brief description 

Step 1: Hand-action codec 

H Action-chunk horizon ( H = 32 ) Ehand , D hand Per-hand codec encoder and decoder 

q, q 0 ∈ R54 Current state; chunk-start state E, D Full action-codec encoder and decoder 

qhand 0 ∈ R20 Hand state at chunk start zhand 1: H ∈ RH×9 Per-hand latent chunk 

qhand ,cmd 1: H ∈ RH×20 Commanded hand-joint chunk z1: H ∈ RH×32 Full latent-action chunk 

qcmd  

> t

∈ R54 Executable joint command μ, σ, ϵ VAE mean, std., and sampling noise 

a1: H ∈ RH×54 Joint-space action chunk ∆k , e (k) 

> t,j

Temporal-difference operator; error 

ahand 1: H ∈ RH×20 Relative hand-action chunk τHuber , β KL Huber threshold and KL weight 

bahand 1: H ∈ RH×20 Reconstructed hand-action chunk wj , λ k Joint and temporal loss weights 

Step 2: Supervised fine-tuning 

C = 25 Executed frames per policy query o = ( I1: K , ℓ, q ) Observation: views, language and state 

tflow ∈ [0 , 1] Flow time xtflow ∈ RH×32 Interpolated latent 

bz ∈ RH×32 One-step clean-latent estimate vω , u Predicted vector field and flow target 

λarm , λ lat , λ dec SFT loss weights 

Step 3: DAgger 

qhold ∈ R20 Pre-takeover hand command qteleop  

> t

∈ R20 Live operator command 

s Elapsed blend time τb Blend duration 

αs Blend fraction at elapsed time s αnew New-correction batch fraction 

Step 4: Real-world residual RL 

πref Frozen reference policy B Replay buffer 

zref ∈ RH×32 Reference-policy latent chunk rt, d t, γ Reward, terminal flag and discount 

η1: M ∈ RM ×2048 Prefix image-token features Qϕi , Q ¯ϕi Twin critics and targets 

ξrl ∈ R2048 Learnable readout token τPolyak Target averaging coefficient 

gφ, W rl Readout transformer/projection R∆z , S Residual/smoothness penalties 

hrl ∈ R2048 RL-token observation representation 

βq , β ∆z , β s Actor-loss weights 

fθ , f ¯θ Actor and TD3 target actor bc, b z Correction and latent bounds 

c1: C , ˜c1: C ∈ RC×32 Bounded and noise-perturbed corrections 

σarm , σ hand Exploration noise scales 

∆z ∈ RH×32 Full-horizon latent residual ν Noise spectral exponent ( ν = 2 )

mtask ∈ { 0, 1}32 Binary residual mask ˙qmax Maximum command change per frame 

switching to teleoperation when the operator’s live gesture differs from the robot hand’s cur-rent commanded pose produces a discontinuous joint command. Beyond the physical disconti-nuity, the initial recorded motion may describe gesture realignment rather than recovery from the policy failure, contaminating the correc-tive supervision. We therefore separate pose synchronization from task recovery by rolling the robot back to a buffered pre-failure state, displaying the operator and robot hand poses for alignment, and blending the hand command over 2 s at the control switch. This mechanism preserves absolute hand control while produc-ing continuous, task-relevant correction trajec-tories. 

The third obstacle is sample-inefficient exploration in the high-dimensional raw joint space of a dexterous hand. As the num-ber of independently controlled joints increases, online reinforcement learning must search over a rapidly expanding space of possible correc-tions, making effective behaviors difficult to discover from limited interaction (Rajeswaran  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

4 Journal Title XX(X) 

et al. 2018). This problem is compounded by contact-rich dynamics, for which simulation is difficult to model accurately and real-robot sam-ples are expensive (OpenAI et al. 2020, 2019; Xu et al. 2026). Consequently, dexterous post-training calls for an off-policy method that can reuse collected experience while making each online correction structurally meaningful (Lilli-crap et al. 2016; Fujimoto et al. 2018). We meet this requirement with latent residual reinforce-ment learning, which searches for corrections in a compact hand-action representation learned from coordinated motion rather than directly perturbing individual joint coordinates (Santello et al. 1998; He and Ciocarlie 2021). Our goal is to turn a pretrained VLA into a reliable policy for a specified real-world dexterous skill. We focus on atomic tasks that can be completed in approximately 30 s; long-horizon task composition and scene-level generalization are outside the scope of this work. To this end, we introduce a four-step post-training pipeline. We first train and freeze a temporal codec that represents coordinated hand motion in a compact latent action space (Santello et al. 1998; Kingma and Welling 2014; He and Ciocarlie 2021). We then fine-tune the VLA with supervised learning in this space, aggregate human corrections through DAgger, and finally freeze the corrected policy and learn a latent residual through online reinforcement learning (Ross et al. 2011; Johannink et al. 2019; Xu et al. 2026). Together, these stages provide a progression from task initialization with demonstrations, through correction on policy-induced states, to reward-driven improvement from real-world interaction. We evaluate the pipeline on five real-world marker-manipulation tasks spanning grasping, bimanual transfer, in-hand rotation, object separation, and writing. Starting from 200 demonstrations per task, we apply DAgger and latent residual RL only when the preceding stage leaves systematic failures. The successive stages raise every task to 100% success over 20 evaluation trials. We make four contributions. • First, we present an end-to-end post-training pipeline that integrates SFT, DAgger, and latent residual RL through a shared hand-action representation for real-world dexterous skills. • Second, we formulate the DAgger hand-off problem under an absolute hand-command interface and identify two coupled consequences of gesture mis-match: executed-command discontinuity and contamination of corrective supervi-sion by gesture-realignment motion. • Third, we formulate latent residual RL that refines the actions of a frozen VLA through corrections in the learned hand-action space. • Fourth, we conduct extensive real-robot experiments that evaluate the complete pipeline, quantify the gains obtained at successive post-training stages, com-pare DAgger corrections with additional demonstrations, and compare latent with raw joint-space residual learning under matched budgets. Videos of the real-robot results are available on the project website. 

## 2 Related Work 

2.1 Foundation policies and dexterous action representations 

Large-scale robot datasets and vision– language–action (VLA) models have produced increasingly capable policies that transfer across tasks, embodiments, and semantic instructions (Brohan et al. 2023; Open X-Embodiment Collaboration 2024; Octo Model Team et al. 2024; Black et al. 2024; Physical Intelligence et al. 2025). Task- and robot-specific deployment nevertheless commonly begins with supervised fine-tuning on demonstrations. Dexterous manipulation makes this adaptation especially difficult because useful hand actions are high-dimensional but strongly coordinated. Biomechanical studies  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 5identify low-dimensional postural synergies in human grasps (Santello et al. 1998), and robotic methods learn related action synergies across manipulation tasks (He and Ciocarlie 2021). Human-video pretraining pipelines provide a further source of structured hand-motion supervision for robot-policy training (Li et al. 2026a). Earlier dexterous-learning systems combine demonstrations with reinforcement learning or use large-scale simulation and domain ran-domization to acquire task-specific hand skills (Rajeswaran et al. 2018; OpenAI et al. 2020, 2019). These results establish the feasibility of learned dexterity, but do not provide ashared post-training action representation for a pretrained VLA. Our temporal hand codec is trained once and then frozen, providing a com-mon action interface for supervised adaptation, interactive correction, and real-world reinforce-ment learning. 

2.2 Interactive correction for dexterous policies 

DAgger addresses compounding imitation-learning error by collecting expert labels under the learner-induced state distribution (Ross et al. 2011), while human-gated variants concentrate supervision on states at which an operator elects to intervene (Kelly et al. 2019). For real-robot deployment, Sirius uses intervention events to reweight mixed human and robot experience during continual policy learning (Liu et al. 2025a). Recent dexterous VLA systems bring this paradigm to coordinated arm–hand control. DexHiL identifies intervention discontinuity as a challenge in high-DoF dexterous control and combines an integrated teleoperation interface with intervention-aware sampling (Han et al. 2026). HandITL further attributes gesture jumps at takeover to command mismatch between human teleoperation and policy execution, and avoids them through relative hand retargeting and shared arm control (Li et al. 2026b). We retain the absolute hand-command inter-face shared by teleoperation and the reference VLA. At takeover, a mismatch between the policy and operator commands can both pro-duce a discontinuity in the executed command and introduce pose-synchronization motion into the correction data. We address these effects through buffered rollback, pre-takeover pose alignment, and a 2-s blend of the executed hand command, without changing the action semantics. 

2.3 Frozen-policy reinforcement learning and latent action spaces 

Residual reinforcement learning preserves an existing controller and learns a corrective action on top of it (Johannink et al. 2019). Recent VLA post-training systems use experience in several different ways. π∗ 

> 0.6

and its RECAP procedure combine demonstrations, autonomous rollouts, and interventions through offline RL and advantage-conditioned policy learning (Amin et al. 2025). RL Token instead freezes the VLA, reads out a compact backbone feature, and trains small online actor–critic networks (Xu et al. 2026). BORA combines an offline action-conditioned critic with online action-residual adaptation for real-world dexterous VLAs (Chen et al. 2026). A complementary line of work asks where policy improvement should act. PLAS con-strains offline RL to the support of a learned action decoder (Zhou et al. 2021), and LASER learns task-family action manifolds for more efficient simulated RL (Allshire et al. 2021). For frozen generative robot policies, DSRL steers the diffusion or flow noise latent (Wagen-maker et al. 2025), whereas ZPRL perturbs an observation-side information bottleneck that conditions the frozen action generator (Yu et al. 2026). Our residual acts instead in an action-side hand codec shared with the VLA’s super-vised training. The reference policy remains frozen, a zero residual exactly recovers its decoded action, and the same real-robot budget can be used to compare latent and raw joint-space residuals.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

6 Journal Title XX(X) 

## 3 Method 

Our pipeline consists of four steps. We first train a codec that compresses dexterous hand motion into a low-dimensional latent, and validate that its decoder faithfully reconstructs feasible hand motion (Step 1). We then fine-tune a vision-language-action policy that acts in that latent space (Step 2). Next, we refine the policy through corrective data aggregation (Step 3). Finally, we freeze that policy and use online residual reinforcement learning (RL) to learn a correction confined to the latent action space (Step 4). Figure 2 summarizes the full pipeline. Table 1 summarizes the principal notation used below. 

Step 1: Training the Codec Action space. We work with a bimanual platform whose two 7-DoF arms carry two 20 -DoF dexterous hands. We represent a single-frame joint-space action by a ∈ R54 , ordered as 

a =  aarm L , a hand L ,aarm R , a hand R

. (1) The four blocks have dimensions 7, 20 , 7 and 

20 , respectively. Action chunks preserve this ordering at every time step, and the measured proprioceptive state q ∈ R54 follows the same ordering. 

Chunk-level hand action encoding. Moti-vated by the low-dimensional postural syner-gies observed in human grasps (Santello et al. 1998), we compress each hand-action chunk from RH×20 to a latent sequence in RH×9

using a variational autoencoder (Kingma and Welling 2014) trained separately for each hand and frozen thereafter. We describe one hand below and suppress the side label. Let q0 ∈

R54 be the measured joint configuration at the start of the chunk, and let qhand 0 ∈ R20 denote the corresponding hand block. Let qhand ,cmd 1: H ∈

RH×20 denote the commanded joint-position chunk for that hand. We represent it relative to the initial hand configuration: 

ahand  

> t

= qhand ,cmd  

> t

− qhand 0 , t = 1 , . . . , H. 

(2) Each joint coordinate of ahand 1: H is standardized before encoding; we omit this preprocessing from the notation. Encoder and decoder are small temporal Transformers that attend across all H frames of a chunk; their architecture is summarized in Table 3 of Appendix A. They use temporal embeddings fixed to H, and we apply the codec only to full-horizon chunks. The encoder emits a per-frame Gaussian posterior, and the decoder reconstructs the hand action: 

(μ, σ ) = Ehand (ahand 1: H , q hand 0 ),zhand 1: H = μ + σ ⊙ ϵ, ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ),

bahand 1: H = Dhand (zhand 1: H , q hand 0 ),

(3) with μ, σ, z hand 1: H ∈ RH×9. The codec is trained with 

Lcodec =

> 2

X

> k=0

λkL(k)WH 

+ βKL KL  N (μ, σ 2) ∥ N (0 , I ) ,

(4) Here ∆0xt = xt and, for k ∈ { 1, 2}, ∆kxt =∆k−1xt+1 − ∆k−1xt; thus ∆1xt = xt+1 − xt

and ∆2xt = xt+2 − 2xt+1 + xt. All differ-ences and errors are computed in the standard-ized relative-action space. For temporal order 

k ∈ { 0, 1, 2}, define the error at each valid frame t ∈ { 1, . . . , H − k} and joint j as 

e(k) 

> t,j

=  ∆kbahand  

> t,j

−  ∆kahand  

> t,j

. (5) The per-joint weighted Huber term is 

L(k)WH = 120( H − k)

> H−k

X

> t=1 20

X

> j=1

wj ℓτHuber 



e(k)

> t,j



,

(6) where wj is the weight of joint j and the scalar Huber penalty (Huber 1964) is 

ℓτHuber (e) = 

( 12 e2, |e| ≤ τHuber ,τHuber 

 |e| − 12 τHuber 

, |e| > τ Huber . (7)  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 7

Figure 2. Overview of our pipeline. Codec. A chunk-level VAE is trained per hand on teleoperation, task and retargeted human-video data, compressing each hand from 20 to 9 dimensions; the resulting codec 

(E, D ) is frozen. SFT and DAgger. Demonstrations are expressed through E as latent supervision targets, and the VLA is fine-tuned to emit latent actions in that space, with DAgger-style operator takeovers folded back into the corpus. The policy is frozen thereafter. Here, ℓ denotes the language instruction and q the measured proprioceptive state. Real-world RL. The RL-token encoder is trained on demonstration data before online RL 1 ⃝ and kept frozen during online RL 2 ⃝. Online, the frozen policy emits zref with no encoding step, the RL token hrl is read out from the frozen prefix, and an actor conditioned on (hrl , q, z ref ) adds a bounded latent residual ∆z that is decoded once into the executed chunk. Rollouts fill a replay buffer from which the critics and the actor are trained. 

Its quadratic branch remains sensitive to typical reconstruction errors, while its linear branch prevents occasional large deviations in the heterogeneous training corpus from dominating the update. The k = 0 term preserves joint positions, and the k = 1 , 2 terms additionally preserve frame-to-frame motion and changes in that motion. The threshold τHuber , joint weights 

wj , and temporal weights λk are specified in Appendix B. The KL term regularizes the posterior toward N (0 , I ), fixing the latent scale and discouraging vanishing posterior variance; both are useful under the latent perturbations introduced in Step 4. At inference, we use the posterior mean, zhand 1: H = μ.Combining the two hand codecs with the arm blocks gives the 54 ↔ 32 codec (E, D ). For a full action chunk a1: H ∈ RH×54 , the encoded chunk z = E(a1: H ; q0) ∈ RH×32 has the block structure 

z =  zarm L , z hand L , z arm R , z hand R

. (8) Each arm block is the corresponding H × 7

action block, while each H × 9 hand block is produced by equation 3; thus the codec constrains only the hand degrees of freedom. The decoder produces the uncompressed joint-space action a1: H = D(z; q0). Adding the starting state to each frame forms the executable command, 

qcmd  

> t

= q0 + at, t = 1 , . . . , H. 

Thus a denotes the underlying joint-space action, whereas the learned policy operates in its encoded representation z. 

> Prepared using sagej.cls

8 Journal Title XX(X) 

Step 2: SFT Policy in the latent action space. We fine-tune the open-source π0.5 flow-matching vision-language-action model (Physical Intelligence et al. 2025). It maps an observation 

o =  I1: K , ℓ, q , (9) to an action chunk of horizon H = 32 , where 

I1: K are RGB images from K = 3 cameras, 

ℓ is the language instruction, and q is the proprioceptive state (Zhao et al. 2023). The observation is processed by a pretrained vision-language backbone, while a noisy action chunk is carried by a smaller action expert that attends to the backbone tokens and is trained by conditional flow matching (Lipman et al. 2023). A chunk is generated by integrating the predicted vector field from noise over a small number of Euler steps. Inference is synchronous: of each chunk only the first 

C = 25 frames are executed before the next observation is taken, which trades the temporal consistency of open-loop chunk execution against reactivity (Liu et al. 2025b; Zhao et al. 2026). Rather than the 54 -dimensional joint-space action, the policy predicts the 32-dimensional representation of Eq. 8, yielding z = π(o) ∈

RH×32 . At deployment the decoder recon-structs a = D(z; q), and the robot executes q +

at at each frame of the chunk. The encoder E is used only during training to convert joint-space demonstrations into latent supervision targets. 

Supervising in both spaces. Because the hand decoder is nonlinear, equal errors in latent space can produce different joint-space errors. We therefore augment the flow-matching loss with supervision on the decoded hand action. Let z be the latent target, ϵ ∼ N (0 , I ), and 

tflow the flow time. We construct xtflow =

tflow ϵ + (1 − tflow )z and train the action expert 

vω (xtflow , t flow , o ) against u = ϵ − z. Its one-step estimate of the clean chunk is bz = xtflow −

tflow vω , whose hand blocks decode to bahand 1: H =Time Command signal      

> Takeover triggered Blend complete
> Policy control 2 s blend Teleoperation
> Policy rollout Human intervention Robot executed

Figure 3. Smooth hand-command transition during a DAgger takeover. Dashed curves show the policy and teleoperation commands, while the solid curve shows the command executed by the robot. At takeover, the executed command transitions over 2 s from the last policy command to the live teleoperation command and remains continuous across the switch. 

Dhand (bz hand , q hand 0 ). The objective is 

Lsft = E λarm ∥(vω − u)arm ∥2

+ λlat ∥(vω − u)hand ∥2 

+ λdec E bahand 1: H − ahand 1: H

> 22

,

(10) Here, λarm weights flow matching on the 14 

uncompressed arm-joint coordinates, λlat on the 18 hand-latent coordinates, and λdec on the decoded hand-action error. Gradients from the decoded-action loss are backpropagated through the frozen decoder Dhand to update ω.

Step 3: DAgger 

Supervised fine-tuning visits mostly expert-induced states, whereas in closed-loop execu-tion small errors in approach, finger contact, or object pose alter subsequent observations and drive the robot out of that distribution. We therefore aggregate operator corrections using human-gated DAgger (Ross et al. 2011; Kelly et al. 2019). First, the last 5 s of robot state is held in a rolling buffer: when the operator judges that continued autonomous execution would fail or breach a safety boundary, they select a point inside that window and the robot  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 9is returned to it, so the correction starts before the error compounded rather than at the moment it became visible. Second, an interface displays the operator’s pose alongside the robot’s to help the operator align the two before takeover. Once takeover is triggered, we smoothly blend the hand-joint command over 

2 s from the last command sent to the robot to the live teleoperation command, preventing a step change at the control switch. Let qhold 

denote the last hand-joint command sent before takeover and qteleop  

> t

the live operator command. For elapsed blend time s and blend duration 

τb = 2 s, the hand command sent to the robot is the linear interpolation 

qhand ,cmd  

> t

= (1 − αs)qhold + αsqteleop  

> t

,αs = min 

 sτb

, 1



. (11) so that αs = 0 at the start of takeover and αs =1 after the blend completes. Figure 3 illustrates this transition. The operator then completes the episode. For supervision, the live operator command is recorded throughout the blend rather than the blended command sent to the robot. The retained joint-space trajectory is converted to the representation of equation 1 and, for the latent-action policy, encoded with E. After each collection round, the resulting corrections are appended to the dataset, and the policy is retrained for 30 k update steps from the same public π0.5 checkpoint. Each minibatch draws a fraction αnew from the newly collected corrections and the remaining 1 − αnew from the previously accumulated demonstrations and corrections. 

Step 4: Real-world RL The RL token. To represent the observation, we use the RL token of Xu et al. (2026), a single vector hrl summarizing what the frozen backbone has computed about o. To obtain hrl ,we take the final-layer image-token features 

η1: M from a prefix-only pass through the frozen backbone, append a learnable readout token ξrl , and process the resulting sequence with a two-layer bidirectional transformer gφ.Each encoder block contains bidirectional self-attention, a second attention sublayer over the sequence entering that block, and a feed-forward sublayer. The output at the appended readout position M + 1 is then projected by a learned linear layer Wrl to obtain 

hrl = Wrl gφ

 [ η1: M ; ξrl ]  

> M+1

∈ R2048 .

(12) The image-token features already incorporate the language instruction and proprioceptive state through the backbone’s bidirectional prefix attention. To retain this information in 

hrl , we train the readout on the reference policy’s demonstration set D by reconstructing its image-token features with an auxiliary autoregressive decoder dψ , while keeping the backbone frozen. The decoder uses teacher forcing with right-shifted target features, causal self-attention, and cross-attention to hrl . Over the unpadded image-token positions V, we average the squared reconstruction error across positions and their 2048 feature coordinates: 

Lro (φ, ψ ) = 

Eo∼D 

 12048 |V| 

X

> i∈V

dψ (hrl , η <i ) − ηi

> 22



,

(13) The prefix features are stop-gradiented, so only the readout token, encoder, projection, and auxiliary decoder receive gradient updates. After training, we discard dψ and freeze the readout parameters (ξrl , g φ, W rl ). During online RL, the frozen readout reuses the reference policy’s prefix features to compute hrl once per chunk. Implementation details and the default offline pretraining configuration are given in Appendix B.3 and Table 6. 

The latent residual. Real-robot data is too scarce to continue training the resulting policy, and updating its parameters would eliminate it as an exact fallback. We therefore freeze the resulting policy, denoted by πref , and  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

10 Journal Title XX(X) 

learn a bounded residual ∆z in the same space as its latent output zref = πref (o). The corrected latent action zref + ∆ z is passed through the frozen decoder D, so setting 

∆z = 0 exactly recovers the reference policy’s original command. Let fθ denote the MLP residual actor conditioned on hrl , q, and zref . The actor produces a bounded per-frame correction c,from which we form the full-horizon residual 

∆z and the resulting joint-command chunk 

qcmd 1: H :

ci,d =



bcd tanh 

fθ (hrl , q, z ref )

> i,d



,

1 ≤ i ≤ C, 

0, C < i ≤ H, 

(14) 

∆zi,d =



> i

X

> j=1

cj,d , arm dimension d, ci,d , hand-latent dimension d

(15) 

qcmd 1: H = q + D zref + ∆ z; q. (16) Here, q is broadcast across the H frames. The bound bcd sets the allowed per-frame correction for each action-dimension group, with bcd = bc 

> arm

for the arm dimensions and 

bcd = bc 

> hand

for the hand-latent dimensions. The actor’s output layer is zero-initialised, so training starts at ∆z = 0 . We apply atask-specific residual mask before adding the correction to the reference action. 

∆z ← mtask ⊙ ∆z. (17) Here, ⊙ denotes element-wise multiplication, and mtask is a binary mask over the residual action dimensions, broadcast across the H

frames. For each hand, the residual modifies nine latent coordinates per active frame, and the full latent sequence is decoded jointly into joint commands. This provides a compact, learned parameterisation of hand-motion corrections. 

Chunk-level residual TD3. Each RL transi-tion spans the C frames executed between two policy queries. At chunk t, the actor takes hrl ,t ,

qt, and zref ,t as input and produces c1: C , from which the full-horizon latent residual action 

∆zt is formed as defined above. The result-ing latent chunk zref ,t + ∆ zt is decoded and executed for C frames. After each episode, the operator labels the outcome; the reward assigned to its terminal chunk is rT = −1 for failure and rT = 0 for success, while all preced-ing chunks receive zero reward. We optimise the residual with TD3 (Fujimoto et al. 2018), whose deterministic actor and twin critics operate at this chunk-level time scale. We maintain target copies of the actor and twin critics, denoted f¯θ and Q ¯ϕ1 , Q ¯ϕ2 , and update them by Polyak averaging. The twin critics Qϕ1

and Qϕ2 take (hrl , q, z ref + ∆ z) as input and regress on the clipped double-Q target 

yt = rt + (1 − dt) γ C min 

> i∈{ 1,2}

Q ¯ϕi

 h′

> rl

, q ′, z ′ 

> ref

+ ∆ z′,

(18) Here, dt = 1 for the terminal transition and 

dt = 0 otherwise. The per-frame discount γ

gives a discount of γ C over each C-frame transition. Primes denote quantities at the next chunk, and ∆z′ is formed using the target actor 

f¯θ .During collection, we add exploration noise to the bounded correction c1: C , yielding ˜ci =

ci + σε i, and form ∆z from ˜c1: C . We use separate noise scales σarm and σhand for the arm and hand-latent dimensions, respectively. For exploration within a chunk, we add white noise to the arm increments and accumulate these increments across the chunk, whereas the hand latents receive per-dimension normalised Brownian noise directly, with spectral exponent 

ν = 2 and a 1/f 2 power spectrum (Eberhard et al. 2023). Before execution, the perturbed chunk passes through the downstream safety clamps; evaluation uses no exploration noise. A replay transition stores 

(hrl , q, z ref , ∆z, r, d ), together with the corresponding next-chunk quantities  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 11 

(h′

> rl

, q ′, z ′ 

> ref

). Here, the stored ∆z is the task-masked residual formed during collection, including exploration noise. For critic updates, the sampled latent action is reconstructed as 

zref + ∆ z. We define the residual-magnitude regulariser on the task-masked, full-horizon latent residual as 

R∆z (∆ z) := ∥∆z∥2 

> F

=

> H

X

> i=1 32

X

> d=1

(∆ zi,d )2.

(19) The norm covers all H frames, with inactive dimensions contributing nothing. Beyond C,hand-latent residuals are zero, while active arm residuals retain their final accumulated values and remain included in the regulariser. The critics regress on equation 18 at every step; once joint training is enabled, the actor is updated after every critic update, minimising 

− βq Qϕ1 (hrl , q, z ref + ∆ z)+ β∆z R∆z (∆ z)+ βs S(zref + ∆ z), (20) For a latent chunk z1: H , the temporal smooth-ness penalty is 

S(z1: H ) = 1

H − 2

> H−2

X

> i=1

∥zi+2 − 2zi+1 + zi∥22 .

(21) In equation 20, ∆z is recomputed without exploration noise using the current actor and the stored (hrl , q, z ref ), and z1: H = zref + ∆ z.The three terms respectively maximise the critic value, penalise the residual magnitude through R∆z , and penalise the second temporal difference of this resulting latent chunk. The actor objective is evaluated entirely in the latent space, so its gradients do not pass through D. The loss weights and remaining RL hyperparameters are listed in Table 7 of Appendix B. 

Online post-training protocol. Online post-training proceeds in two phases. During the 

warm-up phase, the actor output is set to zero, exploration noise is applied, and only the critics train while the operator watches their value estimates on live rollouts. The operator manually starts the joint training phase with a keystroke, after confirming that critic training has stabilised and the value estimates distinguish success from failure. In this phase, the actor output is executed with exploration noise. The critics continue to train, and the actor is updated after every critic update. Before decoding, we form the full H-frame residual ∆z from the actor’s C-frame output as in equation 15 and add it to zref . Three safety bounds are applied before execution. First, 

bc bounds the per-frame correction c before exploration. Second, the hand latents in zref +∆z are clipped to the 99.5th-percentile envelope 

bz recorded during VAE training. Third, the final joint-position command is rate-limited to a maximum change of ˙qmax per control frame. 

## 4 Experiments 

We evaluate the proposed post-training pipeline and its individual stages on five real-world dexterous manipulation tasks, testing each reported checkpoint over 20 trials. The final policy for every task succeeds in all 20 evaluation trials. 

4.1 Experimental setup Hardware and control. We use a bimanual platform with two 7-DoF arms from Tianji and two 20-DoF hands from Wuji (Figure 4). We use one head-mounted RGB camera and two wrist-mounted RGB cameras, with one wrist camera attached to each arm. We teleoperate the arms with a Vive Tracker and the hands using both Wuji Glove and Manus gloves. Both the arms and hands are controlled in joint position at 30 Hz. We record the three camera views, joint commands, and measured joint states at 30 Hz as well. The final joint-position command is rate-limited to a maximum change of π/ 18 rad 

per control frame. 

Tasks. The five tasks illustrated in Figure 5 use the same marker and span grasping,  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

12 Journal Title XX(X) 

Algorithm 1 Online post-training with critic warm-up followed by joint actor–critic training. 

Require: frozen πref , decoder D, RL-token encoder gφ

Require: actor fθ , critics Qϕ1 , Q ϕ2 , buffer B, phase P ∈ { WARMUP , JOINT } initialised to 

> WARMUP

Serving loop ▷ one iteration per action chunk  

> 1:

for each episode do  

> 2:

for t = 1 , 2, . . . until the operator ends the episode do  

> 3:

observe ot = ( I1: K , ℓ, q t) 

> 4:

hrl ← readout of gφ on the prefix of πref (ot) ▷ equation 12  

> 5:

zref ← πref (ot) ∈ RH×32 ▷ no encoding  

> 6:

if P = JOINT then  

> 7:

c ← bc · tanh  fθ (hrl , q t, z ref ) ▷ equation 14  

> 8:

else  

> 9:

c ← 0 ▷ actor output disabled  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

c ← c + σϵ ▷ white arm noise on increments; direct Brownian ν=2 hand noise  

> 12:

form task-masked ∆z from c using equation 15 and equation 17  

> 13:

z ← zref + ∆ z; clamp zhand to bz 

> 14:

qcmd 1: H ← qt + D(z; qt) ▷ q t broadcast over H frames  

> 15:

rate-limit qcmd 1: H to a maximum change of ˙qmax per control frame  

> 16:

execute the first C frames; record the transition ▷ store zref and ∆z separately  

> 17:

end for  

> 18:

operator labels the episode outcome  

> 19:

assign r = −1 to the terminal transition on failure and r = 0 to all other transitions; append them to B 

> 20:

end for Learner ▷ runs once |B| exceeds a minimum size  

> 21:

while post-training is running do  

> 22:

sample a batch from B 

> 23:

update ϕ1, ϕ 2 on the target y of equation 18 ▷ critic action: stored zref + ∆ z 

> 24:

if P = JOINT then  

> 25:

recompute ∆z using the current actor without exploration noise  

> 26:

after each critic update, update θ on equation 20 and export a snapshot  

> 27:

end if  

> 28:

Polyak-update the target critic; if P = JOINT , also update the target actor  

> 29:

end while 

bimanual transfer, in-hand manipulation, object separation, and contact-rich writing. Each task uses an operator-checked success criterion. Videos of these tasks are available on the project website. • Pick Up Marker (Pick up ) succeeds when the robot lifts the marker completely off the table and ends with the marker securely grasped. • Transfer Marker between Hands 

(Transfer ) succeeds when the marker is  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 13  

> Figure 4. Robot platform used for data collection and evaluation. The system comprises two 7-DoF Tianji arms, two 20-DoF Wuji dexterous hands, one RGB wrist camera mounted on each arm, and one RGB head camera.

passed from the right hand into a stable grasp in the left hand and is then secured between the right index and middle fingers. • Rotate Marker in Hand (Rotate ) succeeds when the right hand rotates the marker without dropping it and finishes with its tip pointing downward. • Remove Marker Cap (Uncap ) succeeds when the left hand completely separates the cap from the marker without dropping either component. • Write on Paper (Write ) succeeds when the robot writes the complete word “WUJI,” the brand name of the dexterous hands used in our setup, while maintain-ing contact between the marker tip and the paper. Across these tasks, task-specific adaptation begins with supervised fine-tuning. Pick Up Marker, Remove Marker Cap, and Write on Paper reach 100% success after DAgger. Trans-fer Marker between Hands requires DAgger followed by latent residual RL, whereas Rotate Marker in Hand proceeds directly from super-vised fine-tuning to latent residual RL because its physical object state cannot be restored dur-ing takeover. Every trial is reset manually. Pick Up Marker starts with the marker lying on the right half of the table. Transfer Marker between Hands starts with the marker grasped in the right hand. Rotate Marker in Hand starts with the marker held between the right index and middle fingers. Remove Marker Cap starts with the capped marker already held by the robot. Write on Paper starts with the marker already held by the robot and a sheet of paper placed at the centre of the table. Each checkpoint is evaluated over 20 task trials under the corresponding task-specific reset condition, and its success rate is the fraction of successful trials. Training random-seed settings are held fixed across the dataset comparisons, while the training data vary with the collection stage and budget. Lighting is held approximately constant throughout evaluation, while for each task, the initial object pose or grasp is manually varied within the range represented in the data-collection distribution. 

4.2 Training the hand action codec Training corpus. The codec is trained on three data sources. First, our internal teleoperation corpus contains approximately 38M frames per hand, collected across robots in the same family and a range of manipulation tasks. Second, we use the VITRA-1M human-hand trajectories reconstructed from egocentric video and retargeted to our 20-DoF hand (Li et al. 2026a). Third, we include the task-specific demonstration set used in Step 2, with 200 episodes per task. The task-specific codec data are restricted to these initial 200 demonstrations per task and exclude all subsequent DAgger corrections and online RL data. We train separate codecs for the two hands on the combined corpus. Full optimisation and loss settings are provided in Appendix B. 

Comparison of compression methods. To assess how much of the hand’s motion each representation can preserve, we compare the reconstruction quality of several compression methods, all evaluated at nine latent dimensions  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

14 Journal Title XX(X)  

> Figure 5. The five marker-manipulation tasks used for evaluation: Pick Up Marker, Transfer Marker between Hands, Rotate Marker in Hand, Remove Marker Cap, and Write on Paper. The tasks cover grasping, bimanual transfer, in-hand manipulation, object separation, and contact-rich writing. The yellow-to-red arrow orders the tasks from easier to harder.

per hand. The methods differ in linearity, temporal context, and architecture. Principal component analysis (PCA) provides a frame-wise linear baseline motivated by postural synergies in hand configurations (Santello et al. 1998). It independently projects each standardised 20-dimensional hand action onto nine principal components and reconstructs it without modelling dependencies across frames. Two frame-based autoencoders — an MLP and a Transformer-based VAE — encode each frame in isolation and therefore carry no temporal context. The remaining two operate on whole chunks: a chunk-based MLP, which receives the chunk flattened into a single vector, and our chunk-level variational Transformer, which attends across the H frames of a chunk and serves as the codec of Step 1. All methods are trained on the same corpus and evaluated on the same held-out validation set. We report the reconstruction error in degrees per joint, averaged over the 40 joints of both hands, in Figure 6(a). 

Choosing the latent dimensionality. With the architecture fixed, we sweep the latent width of the chunk-level Transformer and measure the reconstruction error on the same held-out validation set, reported in Figure 6(b). Two considerations set the operating point. The first is accuracy, which improves monotonically with width but at a diminishing rate: the three dimensions from six to nine remove about 1.4 times as much error as the three from nine to twelve do, so each further dimension buys less reconstruction quality than the one before it. The second is a constraint from the reference policy: at nine dimensions per hand the layout of equation 8 totals 2 × 7 + 2 × 9 = 32 dimensions, which is the largest action dimensionality the pretrained π0.5 checkpoint accepts. Nine dimensions per hand meets both,  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 15 PCA MLP Transformer MLP Transformer 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00       

> Per-joint reconstruction error (deg)
> frame-based chunk-based
> (a) Representation comparison
> 1.066 0.659 0.548 0.306 0.275
> 36912 16
> Latent dimension per hand
> 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> Per-joint reconstruction error (deg)
> 0.465 0.337
> 0.275
> 0.231 0.186
> Operating point (32-D action limit)
> (b) Latent dimension sweep

Figure 6. Hand-action codec analysis. Panel (a) compares the reconstruction error of five compression methods, all using nine latent dimensions per hand. Panel (b) shows the reconstruction error of the chunk-level Transformer codec as the latent width varies. All errors are measured on the same held-out validation set, reported in degrees per joint, and pooled across the 40 joints of both hands. The nine-dimensional operating point is selected to satisfy the pretrained policy’s 32-dimensional action interface. 

and is the width used in every experiment reported here. 

4.3 Supervised fine-tuning and data aggregation 

We first supervised fine-tune separate policies on 50, 100, 150, 200, 250 and 300 demonstra-tions, each for 30 k update steps. Using the 200-demonstration policy for the initial collection, we then collect two rounds of 50 corrections using the takeover procedure of Step 3, with 

αnew = 0 .5. After each round, we reinitialise the VLA from the same public π0.5 checkpoint and train for 30 k update steps on the aggregated dataset. All policies use a batch size of 64; Appendix B gives the remaining optimisation details. We evaluate DAgger on the four tasks that admit takeover; Rotate Marker in Hand is evaluated under SFT only. For the continued-imitation controls in Fig-ure 7, we additionally train demonstration-only policies on 350, 400 and 450 demonstrations for Transfer Marker between Hands and on 350 demonstrations for Rotate Marker in Hand. The continued-DAgger baseline for Transfer Marker between Hands adds three further rounds of 50 corrections after the 300-episode checkpoint, yielding 350, 400 and 450 cumulative episodes. Each additional correction round uses the policy trained on the preceding aggregated dataset for collection. All continued-imitation checkpoints follow the same 30 k-update training schedule from the public π0.5 checkpoint, with αnew =0.5 for DAgger rounds and no online RL. The three analyses below build on this experimental setup. 

1) Are DAgger corrections more sample-efficient than additional demonstrations? 

Figure 7 compares each DAgger checkpoint with a demonstration-only policy trained from the same cumulative episode budget. At both 250 and 300 episodes, the DAgger pipeline achieves higher success across the four tasks that admit takeover. Additional demonstrations are collected independently of the current policy and therefore do not adapt to its changing failure modes. DAgger instead uses rollouts of the current policy to identify where corrections are needed. At each intervention, the operator provides a recovery trajectory from a buffered pre-failure state, so successive rounds focus on the errors that remain. 

2) Does imitation in the hand-latent space preserve raw joint-space performance? 

To isolate the effect of the hand-latent representation, we train a raw-action baseline by expanding the action head from 32 to 54 dimensions, allowing it to predict joint-space  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

16 Journal Title XX(X) 0 150 300 450 025 50 75 100                         

> Success rate (%)  Pick up Uncap Rotate Write Transfer
> 0150 300 450
> SFT DAgger
> Pick up
> 0150 300 450
> SFT DAgger RL
> Transfer
> 0150 300 450
> Cumulative episodes
> 025 50 75 100
> Success rate (%)
> SFT RL
> Rotate
> 0150 300 450
> Cumulative episodes
> SFT DAgger
> Uncap
> 0150 300 450
> Cumulative episodes
> SFT DAgger
> Write
> SFT DAgger Latent RL Matched-budget baseline

Figure 7. Success rate as a function of cumulative episodes collected. The overview panel overlays the trajectories for all five tasks, labelled directly on their curves; the remaining panels show the tasks individually. Marker shapes identify training methods: circles for SFT, squares for DAgger, and triangles for latent residual RL. Solid lines with filled markers show our staged pipeline; dashed lines with open markers show matched-budget baselines that continue the indicated method. Background shading marks the stage reached by the main pipeline. Each checkpoint is evaluated over 20 trials. Rotate Marker in Hand admits no corrections and moves directly from SFT to online RL. 

actions directly without the codec. Both variants use the same SFT demonstration subsets and a matched DAgger budget of two 50-correction rounds from their respective 200-demonstration checkpoints. All other training and evaluation settings are held fixed. Their success-rate curves remain closely aligned, showing no consistent loss in imitation performance from compressing each hand from 20 to 9 dimensions (Figure 8). 

3) Where does imitation learning remain insufficient? 

Data aggregation does not close the gap on every task, and on Transfer Marker between Hands, Remove Marker Cap, and Write on Paper the gain from the second 50-episode correction round is smaller than from the first, indicating that improvement slows as aggregation proceeds; Pick Up Marker is already near saturation after SFT. Transfer Marker between Hands rises from 10% to 65% after the first 50 corrections and to 70% after the second round, but remains short of full success. Rotate Marker in Hand reaches 50% under SFT and cannot use DAgger because its physical object state cannot be restored at takeover. These remaining gaps motivate the online residual RL evaluated in Section 4.4. 

4.4 Online residual reinforcement learning 

Online post-training is evaluated on Transfer Marker between Hands and Rotate Marker in Hand, the two tasks left below full success after imitation learning. Transfer Marker between Hands starts from the 70% DAgger checkpoint,  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 17 0 100 200 300 Cumulative episodes 025 50 75 100 Success rate (%)      

> SFT DAgger
> Pick up Uncap Rotate Write Transfer
> Latent action Raw joint action SFT DAgger
> Figure 8. Imitation learning in the raw joint space and the learned hand-latent space across the five tasks.

whereas Rotate Marker in Hand starts from the 50% SFT checkpoint. For Transfer Marker between Hands, the task-specific mask in equation 17 selects the full 32-dimensional latent action, comprising both 7-DoF arms and both 9-dimensional hand latents. For Rotate Marker in Hand, the mask selects only the 9-dimensional latent of the active right hand and fixes every arm and left-hand residual dimension to zero. The two analyses below use these settings. 

1) How do latent and raw-space residual RL compare with the frozen policy? 

To isolate the effect of the residual action space, we compare the frozen policy, a raw-space residual policy (Johannink et al. 2019), and the latent-residual policy of Step 4. The raw-space actor adds its residual directly to the joint-position action chunk produced by the frozen VLA decoder, whereas the latent-space actor adds its residual to zref before the same frozen decoder. Specifically, letting aref =

D(zref ; q) denote the decoded reference action, the raw-space actor takes hrl ∈ R2048 , q ∈ R54 ,and aref ,1: C ∈ RC×54 as input and outputs a 

C × 54 joint-space residual: 

∆raw 1: C = braw ⊙ tanh  f raw  

> ψ

(hrl , q, a ref ,1: C )

∈ RC×54 ,qcmd ,raw 1: C = q + aref ,1: C + ∆ raw 1: C .

(22) Thus, the raw actor outputs a bounded residual in the decoded joint-action space, with no hand-latent decoding in the residual path. Both variants otherwise use the same TD3 training and execution protocol, online interaction budget, task-specific residual scope, and safety limits. They also use the same temporal exploration-noise construction: white noise is added to the arm increments and accumulated across the chunk, while direct per-dimension Brownian noise with ν = 2 is applied to the hand block. The noise amplitudes are chosen to match the magnitude of the resulting joint-space perturbations, measured after decoding for the latent variant (Appendix B). Figure 9 follows both residual methods over 3000 online transitions. At the 30 Hz control rate, each transition spans C = 25 executed frames, or approximately 0.83 s of commanded motion. The latent-residual policy improves Transfer Marker between Hands from 70% to 100% and Rotate Marker in Hand from 50% to 100%. See the videos on the project website for the post-trained VLA executing both tasks. The raw-residual policy ends at 80% and 50%, respectively, and its success rate fluctuates rather than increasing consistently over training. Qualitatively, under exploration, its joint-space perturbations often appear as uncoordinated motion across individual joints rather than a coherent corrective action. The performance gap between the two resid-ual policies can be understood by examin-ing how their action spaces shape exploration. The raw residual can perturb the active joint coordinates independently, whereas the latent residual is decoded from a hand representa-tion learned from recorded motion. The latent action space may therefore bias exploration toward coordinated hand motion and reduce  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

18 Journal Title XX(X) 0 1000 2000 3000   

> Online transitions
> 040 60 80 100
> Success rate (%)
> RL
> 80%
> 50%
> Rotate Transfer
> Latent RL Raw joint RL
> Figure 9. Comparison of latent residual RL and raw-space residual RL over online interaction.

the unstructured joint-space directions that must be explored online. The contrast is clearest on Rotate Marker in Hand, where the correction acts entirely on the hand. Across multiple evaluation trials, the latent-residual policy produces corrective behaviours not observed in our frozen-policy trials, including regrasping, maintaining contact, and recovering from incipient errors. Their recur-rence suggests that the improvement reflects learned corrective responses rather than iso-lated favourable perturbations. Additional trials with randomized initial positions and external disturbances applied to the object and robot also provide evidence of robustness beyond the nominal evaluation condition. Within these two tasks and the tested interaction budget, latent residual RL reaches full success, whereas raw-space residual RL does not. 

2) How efficiently does latent residual RL close the remaining imitation gap? 

Sample efficiency. Figure 7 compares SFT, DAgger, and latent residual RL on a common cumulative-episode axis for Transfer Marker between Hands and Rotate Marker in Hand. For the RL curves, 1000 online transitions correspond to 50 rollout episodes. The latent-residual policy surpasses the frozen policy at that first evaluation and reaches 100% after 100 episodes on Rotate Marker in Hand and 150 on Transfer Marker between Hands. 

Operator-time efficiency. Demonstrations require continuous teleoperation, DAgger requires rollout monitoring and occasional takeover, whereas RL uses autonomous rollouts with terminal outcome labelling. Table 2 reports the estimated operator time required to collect 100 episodes with each method, including manual resets and rollout monitoring. Using the full pipeline, we obtain 100%-success policies for Transfer Marker between Hands and Rotate Marker in Hand with 9.7 and 5.2 worker-hours of data collec-tion, respectively. Under the same collection-time budgets, the corresponding no-RL base-lines reach only approximately 75% with SFT+DAgger and 55% with SFT, respectively. Taken together, these results show a favourable speed–performance trade-off for online latent residual RL: it requires only 1.2 worker-hours per 100 rollout episodes, yet reaches higher final success under the same collection-time budget than imitation-only post-training. Thus, online RL is both more operator-time efficient and more effective at closing the remaining performance gap, rather than merely reducing the cost of data collection. 

4.5 Ablations 

1) How much does each component contribute?  

> Table 2. Estimated human labor required to collect 100 episodes with SFT, DAgger, and online RL. The estimates use the normalized collection rates described in the text and should be interpreted as approximate operator-time comparisons rather than direct wall-clock measurements.

Collection method Approx. worker-hours SFT demonstrations 2.0 DAgger corrections 3.9 Online RL rollouts 1.2  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 19 We ablate five design choices on both online RL tasks, changing one at a time while keeping the rollout budget, safety limits, and optimisation settings fixed. Figure 10 compares the full method with a frame-wise 9-D PCA representation, temporally independent white exploration noise, removal of the residual regulariser R∆z , removal of the temporal smoothness penalty, and removal of critic warm-up. For the PCA variant, both compression and reconstruction operate independently on each frame, without temporal modelling or conditioning on the initial hand state. We retrain the reference policy in the PCA action space before freezing it for online residual RL. The residual actor retains its chunk-wise formulation, exploration noise, and regularisation; the absence of temporal modelling applies only to the PCA representation. All variants underperform the full method. The PCA result favours the learned chunk-level representation over frame-wise linear compression under the reported settings. The representations differ in nonlinearity, temporal context, and initial-hand-state conditioning, and the PCA variant uses a retrained reference policy. Using temporally independent white noise weakens exploration because its frame-to-frame perturbations do not persist as coherent chunk-level corrections. Without the residual regulariser R∆z , the actor can deviate further from the reference latent action, potentially destabilising learning. Removing the temporal smoothness penalty can yield less smooth latent action sequences and reduce control quality. Without critic warm-up, actor updates rely on potentially unreliable early value estimates, which can slow and destabilise online improvement. 

## 5 Limitations and Discussion 

We observe that the effectiveness of residual RL depends strongly on the competence of the frozen reference policy. When the SFT or DAgger policy succeeds in fewer than 040 60 80 100    

> Success rate (%)
> RL
> Transfer
> 01000 2000 3000
> Online transitions
> 040 60 80 100
> Success rate (%)
> RL
> Rotate
> Full PCA decoder White noise w/o residual reg. w/o temporal smooth. w/o critic warm-up

Figure 10. Ablation of five latent residual RL design choices on Transfer Marker between Hands and Rotate Marker in Hand. Each variant changes one component while retaining the remaining optimisation settings. Curves report measured success rates. 

approximately 20% of evaluation trials, residual RL yields little measurable improvement, whereas it becomes consistently useful once the base-policy success rate exceeds approximately 50%. This observation suggests that the reference policy must already visit task-relevant states often enough for local residual exploration to obtain informative experience. We have not systematically characterized the intermediate regime or established that 50% is a universal threshold across tasks, objects, or embodiments. Residual RL should therefore be viewed as a late-stage improvement mechanism rather than a substitute for obtaining aminimally competent imitation policy.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

20 Journal Title XX(X) 

The hand-latent dimensionality is also partly constrained by the action interface of the pretrained π0.5 checkpoint rather than selected solely for optimal RL performance. Its 32-dimensional action interface allocates 14 dimensions to the two 7-DoF arms, leaving 18 dimensions for the two hands and therefore at most nine latent dimensions per hand under our symmetric layout. Although the codec sweep characterizes reconstruction quality at several latent widths, we have not decoupled this interface constraint from the effect of latent dimensionality on online RL. Consequently, our results do not establish that nine dimensions per hand is optimal for other foundation policies, embodiments, or interaction budgets; evaluating latent residual learning with independently variable action capacity remains an important direction for future work. Finally, the pipeline is designed to improve a specified atomic dexterous skill that completes within approximately 30 s. The experiments do not address long-horizon skill composition or scene-level generalization, and the reported evaluations use local variations around the data-collection conditions rather than substantial changes in lighting, objects, or initial-state distributions. Extending the method from reliable task-specific post-training to policies that retain robustness across broader scenes and compose multiple dexterous skills remains future work. 

## 6 Conclusion 

We presented a staged post-training pipeline for adapting pretrained vision–language–action policies to real-world dexterous manipulation. The pipeline combines supervised fine-tuning, corrective data aggregation, and off-policy residual reinforcement learning through ashared hand-action representation learned from coordinated motion. Its temporally windowed takeover procedure enables DAgger corrections while retaining absolute hand commands, and its latent residual policy restricts online exploration to a compact space of coordinated hand actions. Across five marker-manipulation tasks, the successive post-training stages produced final policies that succeeded in all 20 evaluation trials for every task. Compressing each 20-dimensional hand command to a 9-dimensional latent preserved imitation-learning performance, while latent residual RL improved Transfer Marker between Hands from 70% to 100% and Rotate Marker in Hand from 50% to 100% within 3,000 real-world transitions. Under the same interaction budget, residual search in the raw joint space did not obtain the same improvements. These results support learned action representations as a practical interface between imitation learning and sample-efficient online improvement for high-degree-of-freedom hands. See the videos on the project website for the resulting real-world behaviors. 

## ORCID iDs 

Junlei Zhu: 0009-0006-6518-3575 Shenzhe Yao: 0009-0006-0016-5501 Chaogui Huang: 0009-0007-3097-1667 Wenkai Zhu: 0009-0002-1928-5934 Jingwei Peng: 0009-0006-9428-6004 Guanqi He: 0009-0007-6016-9800 S¨ oren Schwertfeger: 0000-0003-2879-1636 Jiahao Chen: 0000-0002-8927-5646 Yide Liu: 0000-0002-2447-3107 

## Declaration of conflicting interests 

The authors declare that they have no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. 

## Supplemental material 

Supplemental material for this article is available online  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 21 

References 

Allshire A, Mart´ ın-Mart´ ın R, Lin C, Manuel S, Savarese S and Garg A (2021) LASER: Learning a latent action space for efficient reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.15793 .Amin A, Aniceto R, Balakrishna A, Black K et al. (2025) π∗

> 0.6

: A VLA that learns from experience. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14759 .Black K, Brown N, Driess D, Esmail A, Equi M, Finn C, Fusai N, Groom L, Hausman K, Ichter B, Jakubczak S, Jones T, Ke L, Levine S, Li-Bell A, Mothukuri M, Nair S, Pertsch K, Shi LX, Tanner J, Vuong Q, Walling A, Wang H and Zhilinsky U (2024) π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 .Brohan A, Brown N, Carbajal J, Chebotar Y, Chen X, Choromanski K, Ding T, Driess D, Finn C, Hausman K, Ichter B, Levine S et al. (2023) RT-2: Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) , volume 229. pp. 2165– 2183. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v229/zitkovich23a.html .Chen Z, Han Y, Shao Y, Liu H, Xu C, Chen X, Mu Y and Lian W (2026) BORA: Bridging offline reinforcement learning and online residual adap-tation for real-world dexterous VLA models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.30226 .Eberhard O, Hollenstein J, Pinneri C and Martius G (2023) Pink noise is all you need: Colored noise exploration in deep reinforcement learning. In: 

International Conference on Learning Represen-tations (ICLR) .Fujimoto S, van Hoof H and Meger D (2018) Addressing function approximation error in actor-critic methods. In: International Confer-ence on Machine Learning (ICML) .Han Y, Chen Z, Zhao Y, Xu C, Shao Y, Peng Y, Mu Y and Lian W (2026) DexHiL: A human-in-the-loop framework for vision-language-action model post-training in dexterous manipulation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.09121 .He Z and Ciocarlie M (2021) Discovering synergies for robot manipulation with multi-task reinforce-ment learning. In: Conference on Robot Learn-ing (CoRL) .Huber PJ (1964) Robust estimation of a location parameter. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 35(1): 73–101. DOI:10.1214/aoms/ 1177703732. Johannink T, Bahl S, Nair A, Luo J, Kumar A, Loskyll M, Ojea JA, Solowjow E and Levine S (2019) Residual reinforcement learning for robot control. In: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . pp. 6023– 6029. DOI:10.1109/ICRA.2019.8794127. Kelly M, Sidrane C, Driggs-Campbell K and Kochenderfer MJ (2019) HG-DAgger: Interac-tive imitation learning with human experts. In: 

IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .Kingma DP and Welling M (2014) Auto-encoding variational Bayes. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Li Q, Deng Y, Liang Y, Luo L, Zhou L, Yao C, Zeng L, Feng Z, Liang H, Xu S, Zhang Y, Chen X, Chen H, Sun L, Chen D, Yang J and Guo B (2026a) Scalable vision-language-action model pretraining for robotic manipulation with real-life human activity videos. In: 

IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) .Li Z, Huang L, Xu W, Zhu Z, Lin N, Ma X, Sheng X and Wen R (2026b) Hand-in-the-loop: Improv-ing VLA policies for dexterous manipulation via seamless hand–arm intervention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.15157 .Lillicrap TP, Hunt JJ, Pritzel A, Heess N, Erez T, Tassa Y, Silver D and Wierstra D (2016) Continuous control with deep reinforcement learning. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Lipman Y, Chen RTQ, Ben-Hamu H, Nickel M and Le M (2023) Flow matching for generative modeling. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . 

> Prepared using sagej.cls

22 Journal Title XX(X) 

Liu H, Nasiriany S, Zhang L, Bao Z and Zhu Y (2025a) Robot learning on the job: Human-in-the-loop autonomy and learning during deploy-ment. The International Journal of Robotics Research 44(10–11): 1727–1742. DOI:10.1177/ 02783649241273901. Liu Y, Hamid JI, Xie A, Lee Y, Du M and Finn C (2025b) Bidirectional decoding: Improving action chunking via closed-loop resampling. In: 

International Conference on Learning Represen-tations (ICLR) .Octo Model Team, Ghosh D, Walke H, Pertsch K, Black K, Mees O, Dasari S, Hejna J, Kreiman T, Xu C, Luo J, Tan YL, Chen LY, Sanketi P, Vuong Q, Xiao T, Sadigh D, Finn C and Levine S (2024) Octo: An open-source generalist robot policy. In: Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) . URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2405.12213 .Open X-Embodiment Collaboration (2024) Open X-embodiment: Robotic learning datasets and RT-X models. In: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) . URL https: //arxiv.org/abs/2310.08864 .OpenAI, Akkaya I, Andrychowicz M, Chociej M, Litwin M, McGrew B, Petron A, Paino A, Plappert M, Powell G, Ribas R, Schneider J, Tezak N, Tworek J, Welinder P, Weng L, Yuan Q, Zaremba W and Zhang L (2019) Solving rubik’s cube with a robot hand. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.07113 .OpenAI, Andrychowicz M, Baker B, Chociej M, Jozefowicz R, McGrew B, Pachocki J, Petron A, Plappert M, Powell G, Ray A, Schneider J, Sidor S, Tobin J, Welinder P, Weng L and Zaremba W (2020) Learning dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research 39(1): 3–20. Physical Intelligence, Black K, Brown N, Darpinian J, Dhabalia K, Driess D, Esmail A, Equi M, Finn C, Fusai N, Galliker MY, Ghosh D, Groom L, Hausman K, Ichter B, Jakubczak S, Jones T, Ke L, LeBlanc D, Levine S, Li-Bell A, Mothukuri M, Nair S, Pertsch K, Ren AZ, Shi LX, Smith L, Springenberg JT, Stachowicz K, Tanner J, Vuong Q, Walke H, Walling A, Wang H, Yu L and Zhilinsky U (2025) π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.16054 .Rajeswaran A, Kumar V, Gupta A, Vezzani G, Schulman J, Todorov E and Levine S (2018) Learning complex dexterous manipulation with deep reinforcement learning and demonstrations. In: Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) .Ross S, Gordon G and Bagnell D (2011) Areduction of imitation learning and struc-tured prediction to no-regret online learn-ing. In: Proceedings of the Fourteenth Inter-national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , Proceedings of Machine Learn-ing Research , volume 15. PMLR, pp. 627– 635. URL https://proceedings.mlr. press/v15/ross11a.html .Santello M, Flanders M and Soechting JF (1998) Postural hand synergies for tool use. Journal of Neuroscience 18(23): 10105–10115. Wagenmaker A, Nakamoto M, Zhang Y, Park S, Yagoub W, Nagabandi A, Gupta A and Levine S (2025) Steering your diffusion policy with latent space reinforcement learning. In: Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL) .Xu C, Springenberg JT, Equi M, Amin A, Esmail A, Levine S and Ke L (2026) RL token: Bootstrapping online RL with vision-language-action models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.23073 

.Yu D, Lei K, Jiang Z, Pan J and Xu H (2026) Beyond action residuals: Real-world robot policy steer-ing via bottleneck latent reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.19919 .Zhao TZ, Kumar V, Levine S and Finn C (2023) Learning fine-grained bimanual manipulation with low-cost hardware. In: Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) .Zhao Y, Bogdanovic M, Sohal A, Tao L, Darvish K, Aspuru-Guzik A, Shkurti F and Garg A (2026) Dynamic execution horizon prediction for chunk-based robot policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.11408 .Zhou W, Bajracharya S and Held D (2021) PLAS: Latent action space for offline reinforcement  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 23 

learning. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , volume 155. pp. 1719–1735.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

24 Journal Title XX(X) 

## A Architecture and parameter budget 

Table 3 lists every module the system runs, its architecture and its exact parameter count, together with whether it is trained, frozen or discarded at each stage. 

## B Training schedules 

B.1 Hand-action codec 

Table 4 summarises the architectures used in the hand-representation comparison of Figure 6. Each method uses a nine-dimensional latent representation per frame. Separate models are fitted for the left and right hands. All methods use the same episode-level 90/10 training–validation split with seed 0, with every frame from an episode assigned to the same partition; failed episodes are retained. The same per-joint standardisation procedure is applied using statistics computed from the training split only. Neural checkpoints are selected by the lowest validation per-joint MAE in the original joint units. PCA is fitted to the standardised training frames using nine components and evaluated on the same held-out episodes. The projection and reconstruction are applied independently to each frame, using a fixed basis for each hand. PCA uses neither temporal context nor conditioning on the initial hand state q0, and is fitted without a temporal training objective. The frame-based neural models are trained for 200 epochs with AdamW, a batch size of 4096, cosine learning-rate decay from 10 −3,and weight decay 10 −4. They use the same weighted Huber reconstruction loss; the frame Transformer additionally uses a KL weight of 10 −3, linearly warmed up over the first 2000 steps. The chunk-based models are trained for 30 k steps with AdamW, a batch size of 4096, cosine decay from 3×10 −4, and weight decay 10 −4. In equation 4, the Huber threshold is τHuber = 1 ; the thumb, index, and middle-finger joints have weight 1, while the ring-and little-finger joints have weight 0.5; and 

(λ0, λ 1, λ 2) = (1 , 0.2, 0.05) . The KL weight 

βKL is zero for the first 4000 steps, increases linearly to 3×10 −4 over the next 4000 steps, and remains constant thereafter. 

B.2 Reference-policy training 

Table 5 gives the training settings for the SFT and DAgger checkpoints in Figure 7. Within each stage, these settings are shared across tasks and dataset sizes; the latent and raw variants differ in the space used for flow matching, and the raw variant omits the decoded channel of equation 10, which has no meaning without the codec. Only the arm and hand weights are then in force, at λarm on all 54 dimensions. The aggregation runs of Figure 7 reuse the same optimisation schedule. After all 50 corrections in a round have been collected, the VLA is reinitialised from the same public 

π0.5 checkpoint and trained for 30 k update steps; a fraction αnew of each minibatch is drawn from the newly collected corrections and the remainder from the previously accumulated demonstrations and corrections. We use αnew =0.5 in all aggregation runs.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 25 

Table 3. Architecture and parameter budget of every module in our system. Parameter counts are exact, obtained by traversing the Flax parameter tree of each module under its deployed configuration. The VLA operates on a 32 -D latent action space ( 2 × 7 arm joints + 2 × 9 hand latents) with a prediction horizon H=32 ; the residual RL policy acts on chunks of length C=25 .

Component Architecture Key configuration #Params Status 

(a) Hand latent codec: per-hand chunk VAE, 20 -D → 9-D per step 

Encoder (per hand) Time-token Transformer (bidir.) 

d=128 , L=3 , h=4 , MLP ×2 0.43 M frozen Decoder (per hand) Time-token Transformer (bidir.) 

d=128 , L=3 , h=4 , MLP ×2 0.43 M frozen 

Subtotal , left + right, independent weights 1.70 M 

(b) Base VLA: π0.5 fine-tuned to emit native 32 -D latent actions 

Vision encoder SigLIP-So400m/14 ViT d=1152 , L=27 , h=16 , 224 2,3 cams 414.80 M frozen †

VLM backbone Gemma-2B (MQA) d=2048 , L=18 , h=8 /1 KV, 

dff =16384 , Nvocab =257 ,152 

2.51 B frozen †

Action expert Gemma-300M +

adaRMSNorm 

d=1024 , L=18 , h=8 /1 KV, 

dff =4096 

427.93 M frozen †

Flow I/O heads Linear (action in/out, time MLP) 

32 → 1024 , 1024 → 32 2.17 M frozen †

Subtotal 3.35 B 

(c) RL token: prefix [M, 2048] → hrl ∈ R2048 

Readout encoder 2×(self-attn + cross-attn +

GeGLU MLP) 

d=2048 , h=8 , MLP ×4 406.96 M frozen AR decoder 2×(causal self-attn +

cross-attn + GeGLU) 

d=2048 , h=8 , MLP ×4 415.35 M train-only 

Subtotal 822.32 M 

(d) Residual RL policy: chunk-level TD3 on latent chunks 

ChunkActor 3 proj. + 2-layer MLP (Dense-LN-swish) 

dh=256 , zero-init tanh head 1.21 M trainable TwinCritic 2 independent Q networks, same trunk 

dh=256 , 1.01 M each 2.02 M trainable 

Subtotal ‡ 3.23 M Total (all modules) 4.18 B Deployed at inference : VLA + hand decoders + RL-token encoder + actor 3.76 B Trainable during online RL 3.23 M 0.08%  

> †

The full 3.35 B VLA is fine-tuned end-to-end during latent SFT and each DAgger round (30 k updates per phase, batch 

64 , cosine 5×10 −5) and kept frozen during RL-token training and online RL.  

> ‡

Target copies add another 3.23 M during training.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

26 Journal Title XX(X) 

Table 4. Architectures used in the hand-representation comparison. Shapes and parameter counts are reported for one hand with H = 32 and a nine-dimensional latent per frame. In the chunk-based mappings, the additional 20-dimensional input is the measured hand state q0 at the start of the chunk.                                  

> Method Shape Encoder / decoder Parameters (enc. / dec. / total) Embedding
> Frame PCA 20 →9→20 Nine principal components —None Frame MLP 20 →9→20 MLP widths (128 ,64) /
> (64 ,128)
> 11.9 K / 11.9 K / 23.8 K None Frame Transformer
> 20 →9→20 2 layers per side, width 64, 4 heads, MLP ×2
> 68.9 K / 68.3 K / 137.2 K Finger positions; decoder queries Chunk MLP
> (H×20 ,20)
> →H×9
> →H×20
> Flattened chunk; 2 hidden layers per side, width 512 0.90 M / 0.75 M / 1.65 M None Chunk Transformer
> (H×20 ,20)
> →H×9
> →H×20
> 3 layers per side, width 128, 4 heads, MLP ×2
> 426.3 K / 425.1 K / 851.4 K Temporal positions;
> q0token

Table 5. Full training schedule for the reference policy. Each SFT policy and each DAgger round is trained for 30 k updates from the same public π0.5 checkpoint. 

Setting Value Setting Value 

Initialisation and objective 

Initialisation same public π0.5 checkpoint for every SFT policy and DAgger round Updated parameters all 3.35 B (vision encoder, backbone, action expert, flow I/O heads) Objective equation 10, conditional flow matching plus decoded hand channel Loss weights λarm =1 .0, λlat =0 .25 , λdec =0 .75 

Flow time tflow 0.999 Beta(1 .5, 1) + 0 .001 

Optimisation 

Steps 30 k per SFT policy or DAgger round Batch size 64 chunks Optimiser AdamW, β1=0 .9, β2=0 .95 ,

ϵ=10 −8

Weight decay 10 −10 

Gradient clipping global norm 1.0 Warmup linear, 1000 steps Decay cosine over 30 k steps, peak 

5 × 10 −5, floor 5 × 10 −6

Precision bfloat16 parameters and activations, float32 optimiser state EMA decay 0.99 Hardware 8×H20 Wall-clock 12 h per run 

Data and inference 

Views 3 cameras at 224 2 Prompt/state token IDs 

T max prompt =256 (task, template, and quantized state; padded or truncated) Chunk horizon H 32 Executed frames C 25 

Sampling SFT: uniform over episode start frames; DAgger: 50% new corrections, 50% prior data Normalisation per dimension, statistics from the training split only Image augmentation non-wrist views: 95% random crop and ±5◦ rotation; all views: color jitter ( 0.3/0.4/0.5

brightness/contrast/saturation) Integration 10 Euler steps of the learned field Decoding hand latents through the frozen 

Dhand , arm blocks by identity  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

Zhu et al. 27                                 

> Table 6. Default training configuration for offline RL-token pretraining. Optimiser, learning-rate, and EMA settings follow the base-policy defaults.
> Setting Value
> Optimisation
> Optimiser AdamW AdamW parameters β1=0 .9,β2=0 .95 ,ϵ=10 −8
> Weight decay 10 −10
> Gradient clipping global norm 1.0
> EMA decay 0.99
> Network dropout 0
> Learning-rate schedule
> Warmup linear, 1000 updates Peak learning rate 5×10 −5
> Cosine decay endpoint 30 k updates Final learning rate 5×10 −6, held from 30 k to 40 kupdates
> Training setup
> Training budget 40 k updates Global batch size 64 observations Training seed 0
> Parallelism fully sharded data parallelism across eight devices

B.3 Offline RL-token pretraining 

The RL-token readout is pretrained on observa-tions from the reference-policy demonstration set using the reconstruction objective in equa-tion 13. Observation preprocessing is the same as for the reference policy. The VLA remains frozen; only the readout token, encoder, output projection, and auxiliary decoder are optimised. Neither action labels nor rewards enter this objective. Table 3 specifies the encoder and decoder architectures. Within each encoder block, the second attention sublayer takes its keys and values from the input to that block. The decoder is trained with teacher forcing, using right-shifted target features preceded by alearned beginning-of-sequence embedding and the RL token as cross-attention memory. Padded image-token positions are excluded from the encoder’s attention keys and the reconstruction loss. The minibatch loss is averaged over all valid image-token positions and feature dimensions. Table 6 summarises the default offline training configuration, including the optimiser, learning-rate schedule, and exponential moving average (EMA) settings inherited from the base policy. The learning rate follows linear warmup and cosine decay, then remains at its minimum for the final 10 k updates. Training uses a fixed update budget, without validation-based checkpoint selection or early stopping. Checkpoints are saved every 5000 updates and at the end of the 40 k-update schedule. The default configuration uses EMA weights for inference. After pretraining, the auxiliary decoder is discarded and the readout is frozen for online RL. 

B.4 Online residual reinforcement learning 

Table 7 gives the online training and collection settings after the reference policy and RL-token readout have been frozen. 

Matched residual exploration. For the raw-space comparison of Section 4.4, we keep the TD3 updates, safety limits, and temporal structure of the exploration noise unchanged. Both residual methods use white noise on the arm increments, accumulated across the chunk, and the same direct per-dimension normalized Brownian noise ( ν=2 , 1/f 2) on the hand block. The hand block is in latent coordinates for our method and in joint coordinates for the raw residual. Their noise scales are matched by the magnitude of the resulting perturbations in joint space after decoding, so the comparison changes the action representation without changing the physical exploration scale.  

> Prepared using sagej.cls

28 Journal Title XX(X) 

Table 7. Training and collection schedule for latent residual RL. The same optimisation settings are used for Transfer Marker between Hands and Rotate Marker in Hand; only the task-specific residual mask differs. 

Setting Value 

Objective and updates 

Algorithm TD3 Actor objective Equation 20 Loss weights βq =0 .5, β∆z =3 .0, βs=0 .5

Actor learning rate 1 × 10 −4

Critic learning rate 5 × 10 −5

Optimisers Adam for actor and critics; no weight decay Batch size 128 transitions Discount per-frame γ=0 .99 ; chunk discount 0.99 25 

Target update Polyak coefficient τPolyak =5 × 10 −3

Actor update frequency one actor update per critic update during joint training Update cadence 200 gradient steps after each newly collected episode Replay capacity 200 k transitions Replay sampling recency weighted 6:5:4:3:2 over the five latest episodes; latest episode guaranteed in each batch 

Action and interaction 

Reference policy frozen after SFT/DAgger Chunk horizon H=32 

Executed frames C=25 at 30 Hz Residual scope task-specific mask, Equation 17 Actor initialisation zero output layer Reference dropout probability 0.5 per training sample Residual bounds arm increment 0.002 per frame; hand residual 0.10 in latent coordinates Execution rate limit maximum joint-position change π/ 18 rad per control frame Warm-up critics only after 500 replay transitions; actor enabled after manual stability check Online budget 3000 transitions per task Reward terminal failure −1; success and non-terminal chunks 0

Exploration and evaluation 

Arm exploration white noise on increments, accumulated across the chunk Hand exploration direct per-dimension Brownian noise ( ν=2 , 1/f 2)Noise scales σarm =0 .01 , σhand =0 .05 

Evaluation noise none Evaluation frequency every 1000 transitions Evaluation trials 20 per checkpoint